h2. Command Line Tool

The Spree command line tool helps you quickly add Spree to your exisiting rails application.

* Adds Spree to your Gemfile
* Copies migrations
* Generates sample data including products and orders
* Also, generates extensions to be used with Spree applications

h3. Installation

The tool comes in its own gem without dependencies on Spree. You can install it with with rubygems.

<ruby>
  gem install spree_cmd
</ruby>

Versions of Spree previous to 1.0 included a binary named 'spree' which will conflict with the binary installed by the spree_cmd gem.
we have included an alternative binary 'spree_cmd'. You can use replace instances of 'spree' with 'spree_cmd' in this guide. The recommended solution is to remove previous versions of Spree.

h3. New Spree Stores

The Spree command line tool will add the Spree dependencies, initializers, migrations and generate sample data. You can run it with out
options to use the current released version of Spree.

You can optionally use the edge version or your own clone of Spree. If you are creating a lot of stores, you can pass the --auto_accept
option to answer 'yes' to all the questions.

<ruby>
#typical case
rails new my_store
spree install my_store

#Using Edge Spree
spree install my_store --edge

#Using a local clone
spree install my_store --path

#Using a github clone
spree install my_store --git=git@github.com:cmar/spree.git --branch=my_changes

#Answer yes to all questions
spree install my_store --auto_accept
</ruby>

h3. Spree Extensions

The tool will generate a new Spree Extension to use with your Spree store. If you share your extension publicly consider registering it at http://spreecommerce.com/extensions.

<ruby>
spree extension my_ext
</ruby>

Extensions include a Versionfile to specify which versions of your extension work with the different versions of Spree. http://spreecommerce.com/documentation/extensions.html#versionfile

