h2. Spree Configuration Options

This section lists all of the configuration options for the current version of Spree.

NOTE: Spree default configuration options can be viewed in *spree/core/app/models/app_configuration.rb*

endprologue.

h3. +address_requires_state+

Will determine if the state field should appear on the checkout page. Defaults to +true+.

h3. +admin_interface_logo+

The path to the logo to display on the admin interface. Can be different from +Spree::Config[:logo]+. Defaults to +/admin/bg/spree_50.png+

h3. +admin_products_per_page+

How many products to display on the products listing in the admin interface. Defaults to 10.

h3. +allow_backorder_shipping+

Determines if an +InventoryUnit+ can ship or not. Defaults to +true+.

h3. +allow_checkout_on_gateway_error+

Continues the checkout process even if the payment gateway error failed. Defaults to +false+.

h3. +allow_ssl_in_development_and_test+

Enables SSL support in development and test environments. Defaults to +false+.

h3. +allow_ssl_in_production+

Enables SSL support in production environment. Defaults to +true+.

h3. +allow_ssl_in_staging+

Enables SSL support in production environment. Defaults to +true+.

h3. +alternative_billing_phone+

Determines if an alternative phone number should be present for the billing address on the checkout page. Defaults to +false+

h3. +alternative_shipping_phone+

Determines if an alternative phone number should be present for the shipping address on the checkout page. Defaults to +false+

h3. +always_put_site_name_in_title+

Determines if the site name (+Spree::Config[:site_name]+) should be placed into the title. Defaults to +true+.

h3. +attachment_default_url+ 

Tells paperclip the form of the URL to use for attachments which are missing.

h3. +attachment_path+

Tells Paperclip the path at which to store images. 

h3. +attachment_styles+

A JSON hash of different styles that are supported by attachments.

h3. +attachment_default_style+

A key from the list of styles from +Spree::Config[:attachment_styles]+ that is the default style for images.

h3. +auto_capture+

Depending on whether or not Spree is configured to “auto capture” the credit card, either a purchase or an authorize operation will be performed on the card (via the current credit card gateway.)  Defaults to +false+.

h3. +cache_static_content+

Enables or disables caching of static content from +Spree::ContentController+. Defaults to +true+.

h3. +checkout_zone+

Limits the checkout to countries from a specific zone, by name. Defaults to +nil+.

h3. +company+

Determines whether or not a field for "Company" displays on the checkout pages for shipping and billing addresses. Defaults to +false+.

h3. +create_inventory_units+

Determines if inventory units will be created when products are purchased as part of an order. Defaults to +true+.

h3. +currency+

The three-letter currency code for the currency that prices will be dsiplayed in. Defaults to "USD".

h3. +currency_symbol_position+ 

The position of the symbol for a currency. Can be either "before" or "after"

h3. +display_currency+

Determines whether or not a currency is displayed with a price. Defaults to +false+.

h3. +default_country_id+

The default country's id. Defaults to 214, as this is the id for the United States within the seed data.

h3. +default_meta_description+

The meta description to include in the +head+ tag of the Spree layout. Defaults to "Spree demo site"

h3. +default_meta_keywords+

The meta keywords to include in the +head+ tag of the Spree layout. Defaults to "spree, demo".

h3. +dismissed_spree_alerts+

The list of alert IDs that you have dismissed.

h3. +last_check_for_spree_alerts+

Stores the last time that alerts were checked for. Alerts are checked for every 12 hours.

h3. +layout+

The path to the layout of your application, relative to the +app/views+ directory. Defaults to +spree/layouts/spree_application+

h3. +logo+

The logo which to display on your frontend. Defaults to +admin/bg/spree_50.png+.

h3. +max_level_in_taxons_menu+

The number of levels to descend when viewing a taxon menu. Defaults to +1+.

h3. +orders_per_page+

The number of orders to display on the orders listing in the admin backend. Defaults to +15+.

h3. +prices_inc_tax+

Determines if prices are labelled as including tax or not. Defaults to +false+

h3. +shipment_inc_vat+

Determines if shipments should include VAT calculations. Defaults to +false+

h3. +shipping_instructions+

Determines if shipping instructions are requested or not when checking out. Defaults to +false+.

h3. +show_descendents+

Determines if taxon descendants are shown when showing taxons. Defaults to +true+.

h3. +show_only_complete_orders_by_default+

Determines if, on the admin listing screen, only completed orders should be shown. Defaults to +true+

h3. +show_zero_stock_products+

Determines if zero stock products should be shown along side products with stock. Defaults to +true+.

h3. +show_variant_full_price+

Determines if the variant's full price or price difference from a product should be displayed on the product's show page. Defaults to +false+

h3. +site_name+

The name of your Spree Store. Defaults to "Spree Demo Site"

h3. +site_url+

The URL for your Spree Store. Defaults to "demo.spreecommere.com"

h3. +tax_using_ship_address+

Determines if tax information should be based on shipping address, rather than the billing address. Defaults to +true+

h3. +track_inventory_levels+

Determines if inventory levels should be tracked when products are purchased in the checkout. This option causes new +InventoryUnit+ objects to be created when a product is bought. Defaults to +true+.

h3. S3 Support

To configure Spree to upload images to S3, put these lines into +config/initializers/spree.rb+:

<ruby>
Spree.config do |config|
  config.use_s3 = true
  config.s3_bucket = '<bucket>'
  config.s3_access_key = "<key>"
  config.s3_secret = "<secret>"
end
</ruby>

If you're using the Western Europe S3 server, you will need to set two additional options inside this block:

<ruby>
Spree.config do |config|
  ...
  config.attachment_url = ":s3_eu_url"
  config.s3_host_alias = "s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com"
end
</ruby>

And additionally you will need to tell paperclip how to construct the URLs for your images by placing this code outside the +config+ block inside +config/initializers/spree.rb+:

<ruby>
Paperclip.interpolates(:s3_eu_url) do |attachment, style|
  "#{attachment.s3_protocol}://#{Spree::Config[:s3_host_alias]}/#{attachment.bucket_name}/#{attachment.path(style).gsub(%r{^/}, "")}"
end
</ruby>



