h2. Creating Extensions

This guide covers the technical details of extensions and is oriented towards developers. See the "customization guide":customization.html for a more basic treatment on how to customize Spree.

After this guide you should understand:

* The important role extensions play in Spree
* How to install a third party extension
* How to write your own custom extensions
* How to share your extensions with others

endprologue.

h3. Extension Basics

There are a few basic steps to know when it comes to creating your own extension.  We'll walk you through how to create, maintain and test your extensions in the next few sections.

h4. Integrated vs. Standalone

Extensions can be created in their own standalone directory (like the ones shared on GitHub) or they can be created within your Rails application.  We refer to the extensions that sit in an existing Rails application as "integrated" extensions.

Integrated extensions are useful during the active development phase of your store.  Instead of switching projects all of the time you can just make little tweaks to your extension inside of your store repo.  Generally you would only do this if you intended to one day share the extension with someone else (or reuse it elsewhere in a private project.)

INFO: The distinction between standalone and integrated extensions is not very important.  The instructions for this guide can be assumed to apply to both cases (unless stated otherwise.)

NOTE: You may want to consider the integrated approach if the extension is potentially useful on another project but you don't want to make the extension publicly available for others to use.

h4. Creating

You can create a new extension using the +spree+ command.  This requires that you have a gem version of Spree installed that is version 0.70.0 or greater.  Once you've navigated to the directory in which you wish to create the extension, you can create a new extension by typing the following in your console:

<shell>
$ spree extension foofah
</shell>

If you're inside of a Rails application that uses Spree, you may have to prefix this command with +bundle exec+ so that the correct version of Spree is used:

<shell>
$ bundle exec spree extension foofah
</shell>

This approach relies on an executable script inside the installed gem.  You can always build and install the edge gem using the source if you want to work with the latest and greatest version of the extension generator.

NOTE: See the "Source Code":source_code.html#building-the-gem-from-the-source guide which explains how to build the gem from the source.

You probably also need to create a test application (inside the extension) which is necessary for using the Rails generators or running the tests.

<shell>
$ cd foofah
$ bundle exec rake test_app
</shell>

NOTE: The test app is not necessary when you have an integrated extension.  The Rails app that you are integrated with will suffice.

h4. Resources

Once you've created your extension you can now create resources in the typical Rails way.  For example, to create a new resource SomeBar you would use the standard Rails generator.

<shell>
$ rails g resource some_bar
</shell>

This will create a typical Rails resource with output similar (not identical) to the following:

<shell>
invoke  active_record
create    db/migrate/20110907191441_create_some_bars.rb
create    app/models/some_bar.rb
invoke    rspec
create      spec/models/some_bar_spec.rb
invoke  controller
create    app/controllers/some_bars_controller.rb
invoke    erb
create      app/views/some_bars
invoke    rspec
create      spec/controllers/some_bars_controller_spec.rb
invoke    helper
create      app/helpers/some_bars_helper.rb
invoke      rspec
create        spec/helpers/some_bars_helper_spec.rb
invoke    assets
invoke      js
create        app/assets/javascripts/some_bars.js
invoke      css
create        app/assets/stylesheets/some_bars.css
 route  resources :some_bars
</shell>

If you're working on an integrated extension then you should make sure your +Gemfile+ includes the following before attempting to generate a new resource.

<shell>
gem 'rspec-rails'
</shell>

h4. Testing

You can test your extensions in the manner you're accustomed to with a standard rails application

<shell>
$ rake test_app
$ bundle exec rspec spec
</shell>

NOTE: The +rake test_app+ step is not necessary for integrated extensions.

h3. Sharing Your Extension

h4. Publishing Your Source

The first order of business is to get your extension on "GitHub":http://github.com where everybody can see it.  Most importantly, you will want to allow others to have access to the source code.  GitHub provides a convenient (and free) place to store your source code along with the ability to track issues and accept code patches.

INFO: It is convention to use the +spree-+ naming convention for your GitHub repository and +spree_+ for your gem name.  So for example, if you are creating a "foofah" extension the GitHub project would be named +spree-foofah+ and the gem would be +spree_foofah+.

h4. Publishing Your Gem

If your extension is ready to be released into the wild you can publish it as a gem on "RubyGems.org":http://rubygems.org.  Assuming you used the extension generator to build your extension, it's already a gem and ready to be published.  You'll just want to edit a few details in your gemspec file before you proceed.

<ruby>
s.name        = 'foofah'
s.version     = '1.0.0'
s.summary     = 'Add gem summary here'
#s.description = 'Add (optional) gem description here'
s.required_ruby_version = '>= 1.8.7'

# s.author            = 'David Heinemeier Hansson'
# s.email             = 'david@loudthinking.com'
# s.homepage          = 'http://www.rubyonrails.org'
# s.rubyforge_project = 'actionmailer'
</ruby>

h4. Registering Your Extension

In order for your extension to show up in the "Extension Registry":http://spreecommerce.com/extensions you need to register it. To do so, sign into your spreecommerce.com account and navigate to the "My Extensions":http://spreecommerce.com/account/extensions page. You may have to create an account first, or you can log-in with GitHub.

h3. Versionfile

Spree is moving at a rapid pace with the code constantly evolving as new releases are being pushed out.  These changes sometimes make it difficult to keep track of which version of Spree is compatible with which version of an extension. To solve this problem extension authors are encouraged to add a +Versionfile+ to their extension.

h4. Versionfile Basics

+Versionfile+ is a plain text file which keeps information about which version of Spree an extension is compatible with.  It was inspired by the +Gemfile+ used by bundler.  Let's take a look at a sample +Versionfile+.

<ruby>
"0.50.x" => { :branch => "master" }
"0.40.x" => { :tag => "v1.0.0", :version => "1.0.0" }
</ruby>

The above +Versionfile+ is saying that if you are using Spree version "0.50.x" then use "master" branch. If you are using Spree version "0.40.x" then you should use tag "v1.0.0".

You should note that we are dealing with two different concepts of "version" here.  One is the version of Spree supported and the other is the version of the extension.

INFO: All Spree extensions should have a version.  This version number has nothing to do with what version of Spree is supported.  It is listed purely as a convenient way to refer to an extension.  For example, "I'm having a problem with spree_active_shipping 1.0.1"

h4. Syntax

A +Versionfile+ can have any number of lines. It is recommended that you put the latest Spree releases at the top. The very first thing a line should include is the Spree version it is supporting. Next, within curly braces, how to get the extension supporting the specified Spree version.

There are four different ways of specifying an extension's compatibility information.

NOTE: All four variations for identifying extension compatibility can be mapped to more than one Spree version.  In other words, it's entirely possible that the same version of an extension can be compatible with multiple versions of Spree.

*Gem Version*

<ruby>
"0.30.x" => { :version => "1.2" }
</ruby>

In the above case, if you are using Spree version "0.30.x" then use the extension as a gem and the version of gem you should be using is "1.2".

Gem versions are considered "stable."  They will show up in the extension registry as such.

*Git Branch*

<ruby>
"0.30.x" => { :branch => "0-30-stable" }
</ruby>

In the above example, if you are using Spree version "0.30.x" then use the branch named "0-30-stable". Notice that when you suggest the "branch" the "version" should not be specified.

Versions identified by Git branch are considered "unstable" or "edge."  They will be identified as such in the extension registry.

*Git Tag*

<ruby>
"0.30.x" => { :tag => "v0.30", :version => '1.1' }
</ruby>

In this example, if you are using Spree version "0.30.x" then use the tag named "v0.30". The version information indicates that the author of the extension is calling that release as version "1.1".

Versions identified by tags are considered "stable."  They will show up in the extension registry as such.  This is also a nice alternative to having to release an extension as an actual gem.

*Git SHA*

<ruby>
"0.30.x" => { :ref => "4aedfg", :version => '1.2' }
</ruby>

In the above case, if you are using Spree version "0.30.x" then use ref named "4aedfg" . The version information indicates that the author of the extension is calling that release as version "1.2"

Versions identified by a Git SHA are considered "stable."  They will show up in the extension registry as such.  This is also a nice alternative to having to release an extension as an actual gem.

<ruby>
#"0.30.x" => { :ref => "4aedfg", :version => '1.2' }
</ruby>

The last example indicates how you can comment out a line. A line beginning with a hash "#" is treated as a comment.

h4. Using the Versionfile

+Versionfile+ has no impact on the actual ability of an extension to work with Spree.  It is simply a declaration by the extension author that a certain version of the extension is known to work with a particular version(s) of Spree.  It's also possible that an extension version might be compatible with versions of Spree not listed.  If you discover this to be the case please send a pull request to the extension author so they can update their +Versionfile+.

There is a crawler which crawls the +Versionfile+ of all the registered extensions once every day. So any changes you make to your extension's +Versionfile+ should be captured within 24 hours.

INFO: You must actually register your extension in the "Extension Registry":http://spreecommerce.com/extensions before it can be discovered by the crawler.

After the +Versionfile+ info has been processed you will see it listed in the "Extension Registry":http://spreecommerce.com/extensions.  Depending on the syntax you used to specify the version you will see it listed under "Stable Release" or "Dev Release".  In both cases there will also be a link labeled "Show". Clicking that link will show you the exact information you need to paste into your +Gemfile+ in order to use the extension.

h4. Troubleshooting

While parsing the lines gathered from +Versionfile+ if a line is invalid then that line is skipped. So make sure that entries in +Versionfile+ are valid. We'll soon be releasing a tool that can verify the +Versionfile+ and provide instant feedback if something is not right.

h3. Testing Against a Release Candidate

The Spree core team will often announce a so-called "release candidate":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_release_life_cycle#Release_candidate shortly before an official release.  This is to allow Spree developers to test their sites and extensions against the upcoming release code.

In order to test your extension against the release candidate you will need to first update your gemspec file.  Let's look at how we would update the "spree_social":http://github.com/spree/spree_social gem to use the new 0.60.0.rc1 version of Spree.  We'll need to modify +spree_social.gemspec+ as follows:

<ruby>
Gem::Specification.new do |s|
  ...
  s.add_dependency('spree_core', '>= 0.60.0.rc1')
  s.add_dependency('spree_auth', '>= 0.60.0.rc1')
  ...
end
</ruby>

You'll also want to update your +Gemfile+ that belongs to the Spree application using the extension.

<ruby>
  gem 'spree', '0.60.0.rc1'
</ruby>

Next, you'll need to update the dependencies locally using bundler and commit the resulting +Gemfile.lock+ to your source code repository.

<shell>
$ bundle update spree_social
</shell>

Now it's time to fire up Spree and make sure everything is working properly.  Assuming everything looks good you'll also want to update the +Versionfile+ associated with your extension so that people can use the new and improved version.

In our example we're adding support for a new 0.60.0RC1 release candidate which is equivalent to 0.60.x in the extension directory.

<ruby>
"0.60.x" => { :tag => "v1.2", :version => "1.2" }
"0.50.x" => { :tag => "v1.0.2", :version => "1.0.2" }
</ruby>

If we're not 100% sure the extension will support the release candidate (or if it's a work in progress) we could reference the "edge" branch (i.e. master) in the +Versionfile+ instead.

<ruby>
"0.60.x" => { :branch => "master" }
"0.50.x" => { :tag => "v1.0.2", :version => "1.0.2" }
</ruby>

INFO: Using a branch in the +Versionfile+ designates the gem as a "development release" which is possibly unstable and subject to change.  Once things are stable you can point to a specific Git SHA or tag so that people can rely on the extension not changing in a production release.

h3. Extension Tutorial

This tutorial assumes a basic familiarity with Spree extensions.  For more detailed information on how to use extensions, please see the previous sections. This tutorial will, however, walk you through a complete example touching on all of the major aspects of an extension. If you like to learn through "step by step" instructions you may want to start here.

h4. Getting Started

Let’s start by building a simple extension. Suppose we want the ability to mark certain products as part of a promotion. We’d like to add an admin interface for marking certain items as being part of the promotion. We’d also like to highlight these products in our store view. This is a great example of how an extension can be used to build on the solid Spree foundation. We'll be adding our own custom models, views, controllers, routes and locales via the new extension.

We're going to assume you already have a functioning Spree application.  If you have not yet achieved this you should read the "Getting Started Guide":getting_started.html first.

So let's start by generating the new extension

<shell>
  $ spree extension FlagPromotions
</shell>

This creates a +spree_flag_promotions+ directory with several additional files and directories as the following generator output shows:

<shell>
  create  spree_flag_promotions
  create  spree_flag_promotions/app
  create  spree_flag_promotions/app/assets/javascripts/admin/spree_flag_promotions.js
  create  spree_flag_promotions/app/assets/javascripts/store/spree_flag_promotions.js
  create  spree_flag_promotions/app/assets/stylesheets/admin/spree_flag_promotions.css
  create  spree_flag_promotions/app/assets/stylesheets/store/spree_flag_promotions.css
  create  spree_flag_promotions/app/controllers
  create  spree_flag_promotions/app/helpers
  create  spree_flag_promotions/app/models
  create  spree_flag_promotions/app/views
  create  spree_flag_promotions/config
  create  spree_flag_promotions/db
  create  spree_flag_promotions/lib
  create  spree_flag_promotions/lib/spree_flag_promotions.rb
  create  spree_flag_promotions/lib/spree_flag_promotions/engine.rb
  create  spree_flag_promotions/lib/spree_flag_promotions/hooks.rb
  create  spree_flag_promotions/script
  create  spree_flag_promotions/script/rails
  create  spree_flag_promotions/spec
  create  spree_flag_promotions/LICENSE
  create  spree_flag_promotions/Rakefile
  create  spree_flag_promotions/README
  create  spree_flag_promotions/.gitignore
  create  spree_flag_promotions/spree_flag_promotions.gemspec
  create  spree_flag_promotions/Versionfile
  create  spree_flag_promotions/config/routes.rb
  create  spree_flag_promotions/Gemfile
  create  spree_flag_promotions/spec/spec_helper.rb
  create  spree_flag_promotions/.rspec
</shell>

h4. Creating a Resource

Let's create a new +PromotedItem+ resource for our extension.  Since Spree lets us take advantage of normal Rails generators we can do this pretty easily.

First we'll make sure we have a test app created.

<shell>
$ cd spree_flag_promotions
$ bundle exec rake test_app
</shell>

INFO: The test app is needed as a context for the Rails generators and your extension tests to run in.  It is not needed if you are creating a so-called integrated extension.

Now we're ready to create the resource

<shell>
$ rails g resource promoted_item
</shell>

This should generate output similar to the following:

<shell>
  invoke  active_record
  create    db/migrate/20110907202658_create_promoted_items.rb
  create    app/models/promoted_item.rb
  invoke    rspec
  create      spec/models/promoted_item_spec.rb
  invoke  controller
  create    app/controllers/promoted_items_controller.rb
  invoke    erb
  create      app/views/promoted_items
  invoke    rspec
  create      spec/controllers/promoted_items_controller_spec.rb
  invoke    helper
  create      app/helpers/promoted_items_helper.rb
  invoke      rspec
  create        spec/helpers/promoted_items_helper_spec.rb
  invoke    assets
  invoke      js
  create        app/assets/javascripts/promoted_items.js
  invoke      css
  create        app/assets/stylesheets/promoted_items.css
   route  resources :promoted_items
</shell>


h4. Verifying the Results

The +PromotedItem+ model will represent products that are "flagged" for promotion on the front page along with a schedule of when the promotion begins and ends.

<ruby>
# app/models/promoted_item.rb
class PromotedItem < ActiveRecord::Base

end
</ruby>

And of course there's also the corresponding migration.

<ruby>
# db/migrate/20110907202658_create_promoted_items.rb
class CreatePromotedItems < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def change
    create_table :promoted_items do |t|

      t.timestamps
    end
  end
end
</ruby>

INFO: The exact timestamp used in the filename will differ on your system depending on when you generate it.

There's also a new controller file so that we can manage these promoted items.

<ruby>
#app/controllers/promoted_items_controller.rb
class PromotedItemsController < ApplicationController
end
</ruby>

NOTE: You may want to add this controller to the +Admin+ namespace as well as extend +Admin::ResourceController+.  This step is omitted in order to keep the tutorial as simple as possible.

Finally, the routes have also been configured for us

<ruby>
#config/routes.rb
Rails.application.routes.draw do
  resources :promoted_items
  # Add your extension routes here
end
</ruby>

h4. Customizing an Existing Spree View

Please see the "View Customization":view_customization.html pages for details.

h4. Internationalization (I18n)

Spree extensions can also provide their own locales/translations.  If you're adding additional view text and you wish to support multiple locales, or if you are interested in sharing your extension with others, it's a good idea to enable your extension with the i18n features of Spree.

In order to properly display the "Promoted Items" tab we'll need to provide an English localization in the +config/locales/en.yml+ file.

<ruby>
  ---
  en:
    promoted_items: Promoted Items
</ruby>

h4. Overriding an Existing Spree Class

Please refer to the "Logic Customization":logic_customization.html page.

h4. Defining Extension Preferences

Let's now define a preference for our extension.

<ruby>
  #lib/spree/flag_promotion_configuration.rb
  class Spree::FlagPromotionConfiguration < Spree::Preferences::Configuration
    preference :show_flags, :boolean
  end
</ruby>

The above example defines a single boolean preference for our extension, :show_flags.

In order to configure these preferences within the extension, we must first instantiate the configuration object in our engine file.

<ruby>
  #lib/spree_flag_promotions/engine.rb
  module Spree::ActiveShipping; end

  ....

  module SpreeFlagPromotions
    class Engine < Rails::Engine
      initializer "spree.flag_promotions.preferences", :after => "spree.environment" do |app|
        Spree::FlagPromotions::Config = Spree::FlagPromotionConfiguration.new
      end

      ....
    end
  end
</ruby>

Now this preference can be accessed using *Spree::FlagPromotions::Config*

<ruby>
  Spree::FlagPromotions::Config[:show_flags] = false
  Spree::FlagPromotions::Config[:show_flags] #=> false
</ruby>

INFO: Please refer to the "Preferences":preferences.html#site_wide_preferences guide for more information.

h4. Adding the Extension to Your Application

Let's now add the extension to our application.  We'll create a simple Spree application for this purpose just to illustrate how it's done.

We'll start by creating a new Rails app

<shell>
$ rails new my-store
</shell>

Then edit the Gemfile and add dependencies for Spree and the spree_flag_promotions extension

<ruby>
#Gemfile

gem 'spree'
gem 'spree_flag_promotions', :path => '../spree_flag_promotions'

</ruby>

NOTE: This is a relative path to the 'spree_flag_promotions' directory.  You could also refer to a Git location or any other convention that is acceptable to bundler.  See the "bundler site":http://gembundler.com for more details.

<shell>
$ bundle install
</shell>

Now that the extension is setup it's time to install (and then run) the migrations.

<shell>
$ rake railties:install:migrations
$ rake db:migrate
</shell>

That's it!  Your store should be ready to go with your new custom extension.
