h2. Application Processes

This guide will explain how the Spree Deployment Service uses Foreman & Upstart to define and manage all the processes required by your application.

endprologue.

h3. Using Foreman

All application processes are managed using "Foreman":https://github.com/ddollar/foreman and a default Procfile is generated for you in the following location:

<shell>/data/spree/shared/config/Procfile</shell>

By default this includes a single Unicorn master process, the unicorn workers are configured via the Deployment Server UI.

*Default Procfile contents:*

<ruby>web: bundle exec unicorn_rails -c /data/app_name/shared/config/unicorn.rb -p $PORT -E ENV</ruby>

The provided Capistrano deployment script symlinks the Procfile into location after each deploy.
Capistrano Procfile Snippet:

<ruby>
namespace :deploy do
  desc "Symlink shared configs and folders on each release."
  task :symlink_shared do
    run "ln -nfs #{shared_path}/config/database.yml #{release_path}/config/database.yml"
    run "ln -nfs #{shared_path}/config/Procfile #{release_path}/Procfile"
  end
end

after 'deploy:update_code', 'deploy:symlink_shared'
</ruby>

NOTE: It's important to remember to not edit the Procfile above directly, any changes to this file will be reset automatically by our configuration management system. See the "Customizing Processes" section below for more details on how to correctly change this file.

h3. Upstart

After each deployment of your application the Procfile is exported to Upstart compatible configuration files which the operating system (Ubuntu) uses to manage your application's processes.

Upstart is responsible for starting, stopping and restarting the processes and will detect if a process has stopped for some reason and automatically restart it. Upstart does not monitor for memory size growth, and will not restart leaky processes automatically.
Controlling Processes

Using Upstart you control the processes of application in a number of ways:

h4. All Processes

You can use following commands to start, stop or restart all the processes in your application at once:

<shell>
sudo stop spree
sudo start spree
sudo restart spree
</shell>

h4. Processes by type

To control all processes of a specific type (for example web, worker, solr, etc) you can use:

<shell>
sudo start spree-web
sudo stop spree-worker
sudo restart spree-solr
</shell>

h4. Individual Processes

You can control individual processes by prepending the process number (i.e. 1 for first, 2 for second, etc) at the end:

<shell>
sudo start spree-web-1
sudo stop spree-worker-3
sudo restart spree-solr-2
</shell>

NOTE: The process number is the concurrency number specified in the foreman export, and not the PID.


h3. Customizing Processes

To add additional processes such as Delayed Job (or other) workers to your application, complete the following steps:

* Copy the contents of the default Procfile and save it in the root our application.
* Make any additions or changes you require.
* Remove the Procfile symlink link line from your config/deploy.rb file.
* Commit your changes and deploy the application.
* When your application is deployed the new processes will be automatically started.

*Sample Procfile containing Delayed Job workers:*

<ruby>
web: bundle exec unicorn_rails -c /data/app_name/shared/config/unicorn.rb -p $PORT -E production
worker: bundle exec rake jobs:work
</ruby>

h3. Changing process concurrency

By default the provided Capistrano script will export a single process for each entry in Procfile, for some process types you want to increase the number of processes started, for example Delayed Job workers. You can customize the number of process exported for each process type by editing the foreman:export task in the Capistrano script.
Custom Capistrano deploy.rb - creating 3 worker processes:

<ruby>
namespace :foreman do
  desc "Export the Procfile to Ubuntu's upstart scripts"
  task :export, :roles => :app do
    run "cd #{current_path} && bundle exec foreman export upstart /etc/init -a #{application} -c worker=3 -u spree"
  end

  ... 
end
</ruby>

The -c (or --concurrency) switch accepts the process type and an integer for the number of processes to start up. You specify mulitple types by comma separating as follows: processname=2,processname=4

WARNING: It's important to not export more than one :web process when using the default unicorn configuration, as this refers to the master process and not the workers, the worker count can be configured via the Deployment's Service UI.

.
