h2. Payments

This guide covers how Spree handles payments and how you can configure available payment methods or define your own.
After reading, you should be familiar with:

* How to configure payment methods
* How payments are processed
* Gateway payment methods and payment source
* Custom payment actions
* Creating your own payment methods

endprologue.


h3. Overview

Spree has a highly flexible payments model which allows multiple payment methods to be available during checkout. The logic for processing payments is decoupled from the checkout making it easy to define custom payment methods with their own processing logic. Additional payment methods can be created in the admin interface. You can define your own payment methods to be available to customers during checkout and for different methods to be available based on the current Rails environment.

Payment methods typically represent a payment gateway which will process card payments but may also include non-gateway methods of payment such as +Check+ which is provided in Spree by default.

There is also a very detailed "Payment Gateways Guide":payment_gateways.html which will cover more details related to payment gateways.

h3. Payment Architecture

h4. +Payment+

The foundation of the Spree payment mechanism is the +Payment+ model itself.  This model has several important associations that we'll now examine.

<ruby>
class Payment < ActiveRecord::Base
  belongs_to :order
  belongs_to :source, :polymorphic => true
  belongs_to :payment_method
  ...
end
</ruby>

A +Payment+ is always associated with an order and a +PaymentMethod+.  Optionally, the +Payment+ can also have a +Source+.

+Payments+ also have a state machine.  The possible states for a payment are as follows:

|_.State|_.Description|
|checkout|Checkout has not been completed|
|processing|The payment is being processed (temporary - intended to prevent double submission)|
|pending|The payment has been processed but not yet complete (ex. authorized but not captured)|
|completed|The payment is completed - only payments in this state count against the order total|
|failed|The payment was rejected (ex. credit card was declined)|
|void|The payment should not be counted against the order|

h4. +PaymentMethod+

+PaymentMethods+ represent the different options a customer has for making payment. Most sites will accept creditcard payments through a payment gateway but there are other options. Spree also comes with built in support for a +Check+ payment (which can be used to represent any offline payment). There are also third party extensions that provide support for some other interesting options such as "Paypal Express Checkout":https://github.com/spree/spree_paypal_express.

h4. +Source+

+Payments+ can have an optional +Source.+  The primary purpose for this is to allow for credit card payments. In the case of a credit card payment the +PaymentMethod+ is a +Gateway+. Unfortunately that is not enough information to process the payment.

In order to process a creditcard payment Spree also needs to know information about the specific creditcard.  This is the primary purpose of +Source+ (to provide a link to the +Creditcard+ used to generate the payment.)

NOTE: Think of the +PaymentMethod+ as the form of payment (credit card, check, etc.) and the +Source+ as the thing responsible for generating the payment (the actual credit card for instance.)

INFO: Don't forget the "Payment Gateways Guide":payment_gateways.html for more information on +Gateways+.

h4. +LogEntry+

+Payments+ can also be associated with a collection +LogEntry+ objects.  This provides for an optional storage of transactional information related to the payment.  In the credit card case, for example, this can store information related to the gateway response for each transaction.

h3. Payment Processing

Spree will process all payments once the checkout is complete by calling +Payment#process!+ on all of the order payments (generally only one will be present at a single time.)  If the +Payment+ has a +Source+ then this is the opportunity to perform additional logic associated with payment processing. So in the case of a creditcard payment, this is when an authorization or purchase should be performed using the relevant gateway.

INFO: +Payments+ are put in the 'processing' state when the user submits the order. Once in this state the payment cannot be processed again. This prevents double authorization for credit cards and other potential problems.

Let's look more closely at the logic that results from a call to +process!+ with a credit card payment:

<ruby>
  def process!(payment)
    if Spree::Config[:auto_capture]
      purchase(payment.amount.to_f, payment)
    else
      authorize(payment.amount.to_f, payment)
    end
  end
</ruby>

Depending on whether or not Spree is configured to "auto capture" the credit card, either a "purchase" or an "authorize" operation will be performed on the card (via the current credit card gateway.)

NOTE: The default setting for for Spree::Config[:auto_capture] is false.

h3. Managing Payments

h4. List of Payments

To view and manage the payments for an order, click the 'Payments' link in the sidebar sub-menu when viewing the order.

INFO: Keep in mind that only payments in the "completed" state will actually be used to offset the order balance.

h4. +Order#payment_state+

The +Order+ also has a +payment_state+ attribute which is displayed in the admin payments screen on the right hand side (it is labeled as "Payment:"). This is intended as a helpful value to show the status of all payments in total and it is comitted to the database (as opposed to calculated on-demand) so that you can write efficient queries against it.

The following possible +payment_state+ values exist:

|_.State|_.Description|
|paid|The completed payments are exactly enough to offset the order total.|
|balance_due|The completed payments are not sufficient to completely offset the order total. The customer needs to make another payment or an adjustment should be made to the order to balance what has been paid so far with the order total.|
|credit_owed|The completed payments are more than enough to offset the order total. The customer is entitled to a refund.|
|failed|The most recent payment made against this order resulted in a failure.|

In production, you're unlikely to see a completed order with a +payment_state+ of "failed" except for cases where you deliberately configure Spree to allow users to proceed despite a failed credit card authorization. Orders that are in progress, however, may routinely fall into this case because it is not uncommon for users to enter the wrong credit card information.

NOTE: You may want to keep tabs on the number of orders with a +payment_state+ of "failed."  A sudden increase in the number of such orders could indicate a problem with your credit card gateway and most likely indicates a serious problem affecting customer satisfaction.

h4. Payment Actions

Each of the payments listed for an order may have certain actions that are available to the admin (i.e. capture, void, etc.) The availability of these methods depends on the source of the payment and the +Order#payment_state+.

For example, if the source of the payment is a +Creditcard+ then then following method is used to determine whether a credit can be issued.

<ruby>
  def can_credit?(payment)
    return false unless payment.state == "completed"
    return false unless payment.order.payment_state == "credit_owed"
    payment.credit_allowed > 0
  end
</ruby>

This bit of code can be interpreted as follows

  * You cannot credit a payment unless its already been processed by the gateway successfully
  * You cannot credit a payment unless there is an over-payment on the order (which will happen if the order is canceled or if you make some type of adjustment to the order that reduces its total.)
  * You cannot credit a payment if you've already issued one or more credits against that payment that completely offset the original payment.

WARNING: Certain actions on credit card payments may result in an error due to a timing issue with the settlement.  Once the funds have been deposited in the merchant account its generally not possible to void such a payment.  Conversely, it is also generally not possible to issue a credit against a payment before it has settled.  Settlement typically occurs 12-24 hours after the initial transaction.

h4. Creating a New Payment

The 'New payment' button will only be available if the order has an outstanding balance. You can enter an amount for the new payment, this will default to the outstanding balance on the order and must not exceed that amount. As with the checkout process, a payment method is selected (if there's more than one available) and any other details are entered that the selected method requires.

h3. Configuring Payment Methods

Payment methods are configured in the admin interface in the "Payment Methods" section under "Configuration".

Each payment method has the following configuration options:

|_.Configuration Option |_.Description |
| Name                  | The name for the method shown to the customer during checkout e.g. "Creditcard" |
| Description           | Additional descriptive information about the configuration, not visible to customer |
| Environment           | The Rails environment for which this payment method will be used.  This is the same as specifying the RAILS_ENV for this configuration (ie. +development+, +test+ or +production+.)|
| Provider              | The Class which handles the processing of this payment method |

Once created, additional options may now be seen that are specific to the selected provider. For example, all gateway type methods have the following options:

|_.Configuration Option |_.Description |
| Server                | Which server the gateway should be connecting to (this is a reference to the gateway server, not the Spree server.)  Choices are: +live+ and +test+.|
| Test Mode             | Transactions should be processed in test mode (if such a mode is supported by your gateway.)|
| Active                | Whether or not the configured +PaymentMethod+ is active.|

h3. Custom Payment Methods

h4. Supporting a New Gateway

Spree comes with built-in support for many popular payment gateways. Most of the gateway support is actually provided by the third party "active_merchant":https://github.com/shopify/active_merchant gem. In most cases Spree just needs to provide a thin wrapper around what's already supported in active_merchant. This wrapper allows developers to provide their own functionality on top of the active_merchant implementation as well as to apply "monkey patches" to fix bugs in active_merchant without forking the active_merchant gem while you wait for the next gem release, etc.

INFO: You can read more about supporting additional gateways in the "Payment Gateways Guide":payment_gateways.html#addinga-new-gateway

NOTE: It would be easy to add support for dozens of new gateways in Spree but we are only adding official support for the ones we have tested ourselves (or a trusted member of the community has tested.) If your gateway is not "officially" supported it should not deter you from adding it yourself and contributing it back to the community as a patch to Spree.

h4. Other Payment Methods

h5. Gateways Not Supported By active_merchant

Its possible that you may wish to support credit card payment via a gateway that is not supported by active_merchant. If you're implementing a previously unsupported gateway then you should extend +PaymentMethod+ directly.

NOTE: There is no need to extend either +Gateway+ or +BillingIntegration+ class if you're not planning on delegating to an active_merchant implementation.

h5. Payments Unrelated to Credit Cards

There may be situations where you need a custom +PaymentMethod+ that has nothing to do with a credit card gateway. In these cases you just need to create a class that extends +PaymentMethod+.

h4. Registering Your Payment Method

Your payment method class must be registered before it will be available to select as a provider during configuration. The following example shows how the "spree_paypal_express":https://github.com/spree/spree_paypal_express extension performs the registration inside the engine's +activate+ method:

<ruby>
  def self.activate
    ...
    BillingIntegration::PaypalExpress.register
    BillingIntegration::PaypalExpressUk.register
  end
</ruby>

h4. Custom Payment Source

If you are creating a new +PaymentMethod+ you may well need to also have a corresponding Rails model to represent that method's "source":payments.html#source. If you look at an existing +PaymentMethod+ in Spree you can see an example of this in how Spree handles credit card payments. In this case +Gateway+ is the +PaymentMethod+ and the payments it creates have a source instance of the +Creditcard+ model.

Lets consider another example where a +PaymentMethod+ might require its own payment source class as well.  The "spree_paypal_express":https://github.com/spree/spree_paypal_express extension has a +PaymentMethod+ of +BillingIntegration::PaypalExpress+ and this class creates a +Payment+ with a source of +PaypalAccount+.

h4. Custom Actions

The +Payment#actions+ method is responsible for listing the actions associated with a payment's source. Your custom +PaymentMethod+ may require other actions to be performed in the admin interface (most likely after the checkout process.) In this case you will need to implement an +actions+ method in the source class.

Along with a method for each action you must define a "can_...?" method to indicate if that particular action is possible based on the state of the payment or other rules. Both your custom action methods and their "can_" predicates must be defined with a payment parameter.

Lets return to the "spree_paypal_express":https://github.com/spree/spree_paypal_express example once again to see how all of this is done.

<ruby>
  class PaypalAccount < ActiveRecord::Base
    has_many :payments, :as => :source

    def actions
      %w{capture credit}
    end

    def capture(payment)
      ...
    end

    def can_capture?(payment)
      ...
    end

    def credit(payment, amount=nil)
      ...
    end

    def can_credit?(payment)
      ...
    end
  end
</ruby>

h4. Preferences

If your +PaymentMethod+ requires preferences, you can add them to your class and they will be available in the edit form associated with your payment. If your +PaymentMethod+ extends +Gateway+ it will inherit the preferences of 'server' and 'test_mode.'

You can also add new preferences to your payment as shown below:

<shell>
  class PaymentMethod::MyMethod
    preference :login, :string
    preference :password, :string
  end
</shell>

INFO: For more information on preferences you should consult the "Preferences Guide":preferences.html

h4. Views

h5. Checkout Related

You must create a partial template that provides the interface users will see during checkout when your payment method is selected. The partial name should be the same as the downcase version of the class name of your payment method class. So if your class is PaymentMethod::MyMethod, the partial should be 'app/views/checkouts/payment/_my_method.html.erb'.

You have the option of providing information you want to show to the customer about the method they have selected.
If your payment method requires a "source":payments.html#source, then the partial should include the necessary form fields to produce a params hash with the key 'payment_source'. When the payment is created, this hash will be used to build the source record for the payment.

NOTE: The partial may also be blank as in the case of the +Check+ payment method.

h5. Admin Related

If you create a new +PaymentMethod+ you must also create two distinct partials:

* A partial to be used on the "show" action for a payment
* A form to be used when editing and creating new payments

NOTE: The form partial should include form fields that match those used in the checkout partial described above.

In the example of a payment method with the class +MyMethod+ you would create the following views:

* app/views/admin/payments/source_views/_my_method.html.erb
* app/views/admin/payments/source_forms/_my_method.html.erb
