h2. Products and Variants

This guide covers products and variants and discusses how they are managed in the administration interface as well as programmatically.

After reading it you should know:
* what products and variants are and how they work together
* how to add new products and variants via the administration interface
* how to configure and use options to distinguish variants
* how to programmatically create and manage products and variants

This guide does not cover:
* "managing stock/inventory":inventory.html
* "categorizing/organizing":taxonomy.html

endprologue.



h3. Overview

Every store has something to sell. In Spree, that <i>something</i> is a product at the highest level. Sometimes products come in different colors and sizes. We refer to those as variants. Neither of these models represent actual stock or inventory in your store (which is InventoryUnit model). Together, Products and Variants describe what is for sale.


h4. What is a Product?

A Product describes something that is for sale, be it a physical item one ships, or instantly downloadable goods, or a service that is neither shipped nor downloaded. These are all collectively known as "Products" in the Spree world. Products can have variations such as different colors, styles, sizes, and sometimes a combination of two or more such varying factors. Sometimes it's difficult for new shop administrators to determine what should be entered as a product and what should be keyed as a variation of a product. The best way to decide this is to ask yourself, "What are my unique goods irrespective of variations?" A Product in the spree store should represent something conceptually unique. A product has these key attributes

|_. Attribute|_.Purpose|
|Name|short name for the product|
|Description|The most elegant, poetic turn of phrase for describing your product's benefits and features to your site visitors|
|Permalink|An SEO slug based off the product name that is placed into the URL for the product|
|"Tax Category":taxation.html|How the product is classified for the purpose of applying taxes at purchasing time|
|"Shipping Category":shipping.html|How the product should be handled with regards to shipping and handling at purchasing time|
|Available On|The first date the product becomes available for sale online in your shop|
|Deleted At|The date the product is no longer available for sale in the store|
|Meta Description|A description targeted at search engine for search engine optimization (SEO)|
|Meta Keywords|Several words and short phrases separated by comma, also targeted at search engines|

A product may be withdrawn from sale by marking it as 'deleted' in the product listings admin page. Details are still kept on the system for reference, but will not be shown on the store pages. A similar mechanism exists for variants.


h4. What is a Variant?

Products that can have different sizes, styles, colors, and so on, are usually keyed into Spree as variations of the product and these variations are represented by the Variant model in Spree. A Product can have zero or more Variants. A Variant has the following attributes that further define a Product:

|_. Attribute|_.Purpose|
|SKU|Short for Stock-Keeping Unit.  An external/human supplied and managed unique identifier for a specific, stockable product item that can be sold|
|Price|How much to charge a customer for the product when it is placed into the shopping cart|
|Weight|The shipping weight of the product, entered in the units your shipping calculator requires|
|Height|The height of the shipping container for the product in the units your shipping calculator requires|
|Width|The width of the shipping container for the product in the units your shipping calculator requires|
|Depth|The width of the shipping container for the product in the units your shipping calculator requires|
|Deleted At|The date the variant is no longer available for sale in the online store|

When Variants are associated with a Product, they are distinguished from each other by their Option Values, which must a unique combination of the Option Types that have been associated with a given Product.  Option Types and Option Values are discussed in more detailed below.


h4. The Master Variant

You may be asking yourself, "If the Product model doesn't have fields for price, weight, height, etc., then how do we associate those values to a product that has no variants?"

The answer is through the use of a "Master Variant," which is generally <i>tucked away</i> as far as many site administrators are concerned.  This special variant record is always created with each new product record, so there is a direct one-to-one relationship between a product and a variant with the +is_master+ flag set to true.

NOTE: You only need to be cognizant of the master variant if you begin to manage products and inventory programmatically. The administration interface keeps all of this nitty-gritty transparent to the end-user. If you're looking to get your store set up quickly through the administration interface, feel free to skip to the next section as it is not necessary to know how the master variants work to use the administration interface.

The master variant will not show up in the +Product.variants+ array and plays no role in +Product.has_variants?+  For all intents and purposes, the master variant is transparent and you can access all the fields of the master variant instance as though it were a part of the Product model itself.  That is,

  +Product.price == Product.master.price => true+<br/>
  +Product.sku == Product.master.sku => true+

When a Product has no option types, values, or variants assigned to it, then the product's price, SKU, physical size, weight, and inventory units are all managed through this Master Variant.  As soon as the first variant with option values is assigned to a product, the +on_hand+ of the "master variant" is set to zero and henceforth, all inventory levels are managed within each Variant of the Product.

The other thing to note about the Master Variant:  When a new Variant is associated with a Product and the +Variant.price+ field is left blank, the +Product.master.price+ will be assigned as the new Variant's price, thus reducing repetitive keying during data entry.


h4. Inventory Units

Inventory Units are the means of managing the stock levels in Spree. When you set the "On Hand" value in the administration interface, you're causing Inventory Units to be adjusted up or down to match the desired "On Hand" inventory level for the given Product or Variant. Inventory Units are tied directly to the Variant model in all cases. When a Product has no Variants, the Inventory Units are associated with the Master Variant.

NOTE: Once you add variants to the Product, you will no longer be able to set "On Hand" at the product level. Instead, set the "On Hand" on each individual Variant's data entry screen. When customizing your Spree views, you should be able to determine special behavior for Products with variants vs. without variants simply and easily through +Product.has_variants?+ and iterating through +Product.variants+ array.

TIP:  The first variant added to the product will clear out "On Hand" Inventory Units for the Product itself.



h3. Using the Administration Interface

In the Spree Administration interface, Products, Variants, Option Types, Properties, and Prototypes are all managed under the Products Tab and this guide will walk you through all aspects of managing your Products under this tab.

NOTE: All topics in this section assume you are logged into the Spree administration interface and have highlighted the "Products" tab.


h4. Upfront Considerations

The Product and Variant models were kept intentionally minimal, providing attributes that are generally needed to drive an uncluttered store-front and feed into line items on an order (such as price, weight, shipping size, etc.). But fear not for Spree offers many ways to extend your products and make them quite rich. Here are the various up-front considerations for setting up your new store:

* How will your products be shipped and taxed?  It is best to establish your Shipping Categories and Tax Categories before keying in your products so that you can choose appropriate values for these fields as you populate your store with new products.

* If your products have additional defining properties (such as length, material, gender, etc.) that you wish to manage outside the description of the product, you should set up Product Properties.

* If you have products that can vary by size, color, or other attributes that should be shopper selectable, then you should set up Option Types rather than Properties for the Product. Option Types then allow you to add Variants to the products with specific Option Value combinations (XL, red, etc.).

* If you wish to speed up the repetitive task of adding products with the same extended properties or option types, then set up Product Prototypes, which you can then select from a drop-down list when adding a new Product to quickly get a new Product with all those extended Product Property fields and Option Types available.

The above are the common up-front considerations you should deal with before keying in products and variants as the entry forms will require the above "infrastructure" to be declared before you can fill in data for Product Properties or associate variants to products.

h4. Properties

Properties allow you to extend the Product model with additional attributes that helps the store administrator to consistently describe all details about the product such as length, material, gender, brand, and so on. Properties enrich the Product Model, but does not provide selectable options to the shopper to pick from when choosing a Product to purchase. Since certain Properties may apply to many products, Spree manages a global set of properties.

NOTE: In Spree parlance, a "Property" that is associated with a specific Product is then called a "Product Property." So, watch out for this subtle distinction in the documentation. Properties have not been associated with a given Product, yet, whereas Product Properties have!

To add a new Property, click on "Properties" sub-tab, then click the "New Property" button. Here, you will be able to add a name (the internal label) and presentation (what is presented to the shopper on-screen).

NOTE: Properties are displayed after the description on the product's fly-page.

TIP: Prototypes can be set up to include sets of these properties when a product is first created.

Once you have defined a Property, you can then associate that Property with a given Product. You can specify which keys you want to associate and then give corresponding values via the "Product Properties" menu in the sidebar. If you selected a prototype when creating the product, certain keys may already be set up. Otherwise, type in the (internal) name of an existing property and a value.

NOTE: The Option Type must already exist - it is not automatically created.

INFO: Product Properties are implemented using the Entity/Attribute/Value (EAV) design pattern.  If your implementation needs require new fields to be added directly to the Product or Variant tables, then see the "extension guide":/extensions.html guide for more information on easily extending the Spree core system.


h4. Product Option Types

Before one can begin associating Variants with Products, Option Types must be defined and the administration interface has a sub-tab called "Option Types" for this.  When you click on the "New Option Type" button, you are presented with the entry form for adding an Option Type.

|_. Attribute|_.Purpose|
|Name|A short, internal name (not displayed to shoppers) that easily distinguishes the option type.  This is useful if you have options that may have similar values, but are clearly different in some meaningful aspect (such as "shirt color" vs. "mug colors")|
|Presentation|The label that is displayed in the online storefront to shoppers|

h5. Option Values

Each Option Type should then have one ore more Option Values assigned to it. This is essentially the choices themselves (e.g. Red, Green, Blue) that characterize the given Option Type. Option Values define or characterize a variant, and a variant must have one value for each "option type" that has been associated with the Product. For example, where size and color options have been set up, one variant can be 'Small' and 'Red', or another could be 'Large' and 'Green'.

To create a variant, you just give a (not yet used) combination of the product's option types, and enter any variant-specific information. See the "inventory guide":inventory.html for information on stock control issues.


h4. Product Prototypes

Spree provides prototypes as a kind of template for related products. Selecting a prototype at the first stage of product creation associates the new product with certain properties and option types. This is a useful time-saving measure and helps get consistency within groups of similar products. You can define new prototypes using the sub-tab under the main Products menu, where you name a prototype and select the properties and option types to use.

h4. Images

Images can be associated with a either a product or any of it's variants. When uploading an image for products that contain variants a drop-down menu allows you to select which object the image applies to. Note if a product does not contain any variants then the drop-down is not displayed to ensure that basic implementations are not cluttered with unnecessary administration options.

Spree automatically handles creation and storage of several size versions of each image (via the Paperclip plugin). The default is to create four styles according to the ImageMagick spec.

<shell>
:styles => {
  :mini => '48x48>',
  :small => '100x100>',
  :product => '240x240>',
  :large => '600x600>'
  }
</shell>

h5. Configuration

From the admin there are a variety of configuration options that can be set relating to images:

* Attachment Path - Where the images are stored on the filesystem
* Attachment URL - Where the images are accessible through the site
* Paperclip Styles - Override the styles above with your own sizes or names
* Amazon S3 Configuration


h3. Going Deeper

For those of you looking to do more advanced handling of Products, Variants, and Inventory beyond what the basic views and store administration interface provides, this section is for you and covers more intricate details about the Spree models and the ground rules for programmatically handling and managing the products, variants, and inventory units.

h4. The Ground Rules

h5. Product

*  Products may or may not have variants.
*  Every product has one master variant, which stores price and sku, size and weight, etc.
*  The master variant attributes are directly accessible on the Product model (via delegation)

h5. Master Variant

*  The master variant does not have option values associated with it.
*  Price, SKU, size, weight, etc. are all delegated to the master variant.
*  Contains on_hand inventory levels only when there are no variants for the product.

h5. Variants

*  All variants can access the product properties directly (via reverse delegation).
*  Inventory units are tied to Variant.
*  The master variant can have inventory units, but not option values.
*  All other variants have option values and may have inventory units.
*  Sum of on_hand each variant's inventory level determine "on_hand" level for the product.


h4. The Product Model

The Product model has several methods that simplify the logic used in views and controllers for retrieving, displaying, and making other decisions about how a product is presented or purchased in the store front.

h5. has_variants?

Returns true if the product has any variants (the master variant is not a member of the variants array)

h5. on_hand

Returns the number of inventory units "on_hand" for this product.  If the product has variants, then
+on_hand+ is the sum of each variant's inventory level.

h5. on_hand=(new_level)

Adjusts the "on_hand" inventory level for the product up or down to match the given new_level.  Once a product has variants, this method is disabled as on_hand must then be set at each variant rather than at the product level.

h5. has_stock?

Returns true if there are inventory units (any variant) with "on_hand" state for this product

h5. product_price helper

The price for a product or variant can be obtained using +product_price+ helper method. By default, this returns a string formatted with the locale's currency settings, but this can be overridden with an option: +product_price(some_thing, :format_as_currency => false)+

h5. Product images

In views, you can generate an image's URL file with +image.attachment.url(:product)+, i.e. using the name of a declared image format as an argument.


h4. The Variant Model

h5. on_hand

Returns number of inventory units for a given variant that is in the "on_hand" state.

h5. on_hand=(new_level)

Adjusts the inventory units to match the given new level.  If inventory is increased and there are currently inventory units for the given variant in back_ordered state, then the "back_ordered" inventory units are flagged as "sold" and the balance of the new inventory level is then added as "on_hand."

h5. on_backorder

Returns number of units currently on backorder for this variant.

h5. in_stock?

Returns true if at least one inventory unit of this variant is "on_hand"

h5. available?

Returns true if this variant is allowed to be placed on a new order.


h3. Further Reading

NOTE: The "migration section":migration.html of the guides gives an overview on how to import data programmatically into Spree.


"Steph Skardal":http://github.com/stephskardal has produced a useful blog post on
"product optioning":http://blog.endpoint.com/2010/01/rails-ecommerce-spree-hooks-comments.html.
This discusses how the variant option representation works and how she used it to build an
extension for enhanced product option selection.
The blog post appeared in the "End Point Blog":http://blog.endpoint.com/.
