h2. Spree 1.1.0 Release Notes

endprologue.

h3. Summary

This is the official 1.1 Release of Spree. This is a minor release, and so backwards compatibility with extensions and applications is mostly guaranteed. There may still be some changes required for your extensions or applications, and so please read the changelog below to know if you are affected.

If any particular extension your store uses is not yet compatible you are encouraged to alert the Spree team about it by filing an issue on that extension project if it's an official extension, or to submit a patch to that project to upgrade compatibility.

h3. Major changes (backwards incompatibility)

h4. Support for Rails 3.2.x only

Support for Rails 3.1.x is dropped. Rails 3.2.x offers performance boost in development
mode and is the first-class supported platform for 1.1.x release cycles. It is recommended
that you use the latest version 3.2.3. Please upgrade your Rails before bumping Spree gem by modifying your Gemfile:

    gem 'rails', '3.2.3'
    group :assets do
      gem 'sass-rails',   '~> 3.2.3'
      gem 'coffee-rails', '~> 3.2.1'
      gem 'uglifier', '>= 1.0.3'
      gem 'jquery-rails'
    end

h4. ransack replaced meta_search

`ransack` replaced `meta_search` as the primary object-based searching mechanism.
Be warned that `ransack` is not fully backward-compatible with `meta_search` query.
Make sure you port and test all `meta_search` queries to `ransack` after upgrade.

h4. spree_product_groups now as standalone extension

Product Groups component has been extracted to a standalone spree extension. It is recommended that if you are using this functionality to add the new extension to your Gemfile:

    gem 'spree_product_groups', :git => 'git@github.com:spree/spree_product_groups.git'

h4. Old Theme Hook

+theme_support+ files are now deprecated in favor of Deface. Make sure you port
all your old style hooks to Deface.

h4. Major rewrite of Creditcard model

Prior to 1.1, the +Creditcard+ model contained a lot of payment processing code. This has "since been moved":https://github.com/spree/spree/commit/0e684e01b5a15ec21b34263699004ebd78692f0d into the +Payment+ model. If you have customized the +Spree::Admin::PaymentsController+ or depend on any of the payment processing methods inside the +CreditCard+ model such as +authorize+, +credit+, or +void+, this change may affect you.

h4. API rewrite

The API component of Spree has undergone a major rewrite in order to provide better support for applications wishing to interact with it using tools such as Backbone, or for people wishing to just generally access the individual components of Spree.

This is currently a work-in-progress and we would appreciate feedback on the API on the "mailing list":https://groups.google.com/group/spree-user.

As a part of this, the +spree/spree_api+ assets are no longer available, and so these should be removed from the +store/all.css+, +store/all.js+, +store/admin/all.css+ and +store/admin/all.js+ assets located in your application.

h3. Minor changes

h4. New option for Heroku deploys

When deploying to Heroku, you may have encountered "an issue":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1159 where, by setting +config.assets.initialize_on_precompile = false+ in your +config/application.rb+, the Spree assets were no longer being compiled. This has now been "fixed". Underneath the +config.assets.initialize_on_precompile+ line, you will need to put this additional line to tell the asset pipeline to include all of Spree's assets:

<ruby>
Spree::Core::Engine.add_assets_to_precompile_list!(self)
</ruby>

h4. Stronger mass assignment protection

As per the "Rails 3.2.3 release notes":https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups#!topic/rubyonrails-core/X-zNKaPOVJw , there is a stronger enforcement of attribute protection within Rails. This *may* affect your Spree application, and if it does we would advise "filing an issue":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues so that it can be promptly fixed. While the tests for Spree itself are extensive, there may still be edge cases where your application goes that we do not have covered.

h4. Removed images association of +Spree::Product+

+Spree::Product+ association with +viewable+ has been moved +master+ variant of
the product. The change is backward compatible and require no upgrade modification.

A call to the +images+ method on a +Spree::Product+ will return all the images associated with all the variants of this product. If you want just the +master+ variant's images, use +product.master.images+.

The version of Paperclip required by Spree 1.1 is now any version of the 2.7.x branch of Paperclip.

h4. Clearer separation of Spree components

It was "brought to our attention":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1292 that the Core component of Spree depended upon things from other components, primarily Auth. The purpose of the Core component is that it should be usable in complete isolation from all other components of Spree. This feature was regressed during the 1..0 branch, but has "now been fixed":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1296 in the 1.1 branch.

From 1.1 onwards, you will once again be able to use the Core component of Spree in isolation from the other components if you choose so.

h4. Allow for easier Spree controller spec testing

We have added a +Spree::Core::TestingSupport::ControllerRequests+ module to aid in the testing of Spree controllers within not only the Spree components, but also within your application. "The documentation at the top of this module":https://github.com/spree/spree/blob/1-1-stable/core/lib/spree/core/testing_support/controller_requests.rb should adequately describe how this works.

h4. Deprecated functions

h5. Spree::Zone

+Spree::Zone#in_zone?+ is retired, please use +Spree::Zone#include?+ instead.

h5. Spree::PaymentMethod

+Spree::PaymentMethod.current+ is retired, please use +current_order.payment_method+ instead.

Additionally, +current_gateway+ is also removed.

h5. Spree::ProductsHelper

+product_price+ is retired, please use +number_to_currency+ instead.

h5. Spree::HookHelper

+hook+ is retired, please use Deface instead.

h5. Spree::Variant

+Spree::Variant.additional_fields+ has been deprecated in favour of using decorators and Deface. Please see "#1406":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1406 for more information.

h3. Patches

h4. Version bumps

* Paperclip version has been bumped to 2.7.0. "#1148":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1148 + "#1152":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1152
* Stringex version has been bumped to 1.3.2 to prevent 1.3.1 from being used, as that release contained a bug.
* nested_set version has been bumped to 1.7.0. "9b7eda3":https://github.com/spree/spree/commit/9b7eda361dcb001ffa5ad20cd124428d95da21d6
* jquery-rails version has been bumped to ~> 2.0.0. "d4b3d7":https://github.com/spree/spree/commit/d4b3d76491
* deface version has been bumped to 0.8.0. "e571ed":https://github.com/spree/spree/commit/e571edd86dfadab48e4243caf4fd850a3fd10553
* highline version has been bumped to 1.6.11. "45f5e2":https://github.com/spree/spree/commit/45f5e2


h4. Other fixes

* Added +admin/orders/address_states.js+ to precompile list. "#754":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/754
* Added initializer to warn about orphaned preferences. "commit 4f2669":https://github.com/spree/spree/commit/4f2669
* Address.default will no longer provide a nil value if the default country is deleted. "#1142":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1142 + "#997":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/997
* Fix undefined_method to_d for PriceSack Shipping. "#1156":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1156
* Fixed rounding calculation bug for VAT. "#1128":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1128 + "#1172":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1172
* Allow +:error+ key to be passed to +link_to_delete". "#1169":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1169
* Fix issue where assigning a price such as "$5" (rather than just '5') to a variant caused it to set the price to 0. "#1173":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1173
* Product names longer than 50 characters are now truncated. "#1171":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1171
* Fix issue where preferences set to +false+ were not being saved. "#1177":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1177
* Fix incorrect variable name in +script/rails+ file inside extension generator. "#1135":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1135
* Acknowledge +Spree[:default_locale]+ before +Rails.application.config.i18n.default_locale+ for Spree's locale details. "#1184":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1184
* Fix issue where preferences set to an empty string were not being saved. "#1187":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1187
* Set +default_url_options[:host]+ in +mail_settings.rb+ so that it doesn't need to be set manually for each environment or mailer. "#1188":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1188
* Correctly fire events for content paths and actions. "#1141":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1141
* Allow preferences with a type of +:text+.
* Image settings (such as width & height) are now configurable via the Admin interface. "7d987fe":https://github.com/spree/spree/commit/7d987fe0e86d799d0896e123e638745201e7adb8
* Fix bug where +Payment#build_source+ would fail dependent on the ordering of the hash passed in. "#981":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/981
* Fix issue where states javascript include would be prefixed with asset host when alternate asset host was configured. "#1213":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1213
* Fix issue where +Promotion#products+ would return no products due to incorrect class specification. "#1237":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1237
* Order email addresses are now validated with the Mail gem. "#1238":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1238
* Attempt to access +/admin/products/{id}+ will now redirect to +/admin/products/{id}+. "#1239":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1239
* Show 'N/A' for tax category on +/admin/tax_rates+ if a tax rate doesn't have a tax category. "#535":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/#535
* Fix issue where incorrect order assignment was breaking return authorization creation. "#1107":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1107 "#1109":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1109 "#1149":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1149
* Fix issue where under certain circumstances users were able to view other people's order information. "#1243":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1243
* Fix issue where searching for orders by SKU was broken in admin backend. "#1259":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1259
* Logout when "Remember me" was checked for login now will actually log a user out. "#1257":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1257
* +Spree::UrlHelpers+ has moved to +Spree::Core::UrlHelpers+ "3bf5df":https://github.com/spree/spree/commit/3bf5df57e3474322dc484eb57ca5ee9098bd9454
* Preview buttons on the admin dashboard are now hidden once the dashboard has been configured. "#1271":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1271
* Slightly alter permalink code so that it does not conflict on similar names. Current permalinks will not be affected. "#1254":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1254
* Don't allow payments to be created in admin backend unless payment methods have been defined. "#1269":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1269
* +Address#full_name+ will now return a string with no extra spaces around it. "#1298":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1298
* Ensure +StatesController+ always returns JS response. "#1304":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1304
* Fix issue where checkbox for "Use Billing Address" was not being checked for an order in admin backend when it was in the frontend. "#1290":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1290
* Fix issue where a shipping method could not be updated. "#1331":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1331
* Allow layout to be customized based on a configuration setting. "#1355":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1355
* +Rails.application.config.assets.debug+ is no longer hardcoded to +false+ in Spree. Set this variable at your discretion inside your +config/application.rb+ from now on. "#1356":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1356
* Added +gem_available?+ method to +BaseHelper+ to be able to check if an extension is available. "#1241":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1241
* Fixed potential bug where +Activator.active+ scope may have not been returning activators that were currently active. "#1343":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1343
* Fix incorrect route issue when updating a return authorization. "#1343":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1343
* Fixed issue where "Add to Cart" button may not work on IE7. "#1397":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1397
* Fixed issue where non-price characters were being stripped from prices. "#1392":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1392 "#1400":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1400
* Limit ProductsController#show to only show active products. "#1390":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1390
* Spree::Calculator::PerItem will now calculate per-item, rather than per-line-item. This means that if you have a per-item calculator costing $1 and 3 line items with quantity of 5 that would be $15, rather than $3. "#1414":https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/1414
