h2. Security

This guide covers basic issues related to security and data privacy as it pertains to Spree.  After reading it you should know:
* The mechanism by which Spree performs authentication.
* How Spree deals with role-based permissions for various resources.
* How to modify the default authentication and authorization schemes.
* The Spree approach to safeguarding credit card and other sensitive data.

endprologue.

h3. General

Proper application design, intelligent programming, and secure infrastructure are all essential in creating a secure e-commerce store using any software (Spree included.)  The Spree team has done its best to provide you with the tools to create a secure and profitable web presence but it is up to you to take these tools and put them in good practice. We highly recommend reading and understanding the "Rails Security Guide":http://guides.rubyonrails.org/security.html and to keep up with the "Ruby on Rails Security Project":http://www.rorsecurity.info/.

h3. Reporting Security Issues

Please do not announce potential security vulnerabilities in public. We have a "dedicated email address":mailto:security@spreecommerce.com for reporting these concerns. We will work quickly to determine the severity of the issue and provide a fix for the appropriate versions. 

h3. Authentication

If you install spree_auth_devise when setting up your app, we use a third party authentication library for Ruby known as "Devise":https://github.com/plataformatec/devise. This library provides a host of useful functionality that is in turn available to Spree, including the following features:

* Authentication
* Strong password encryption (with the ability to specify your own algorithms)
* "Remember Me" cookies
* "Forgot my password" emails
* Token-based access (for REST API)

h4. Devise Configuration

NOTE: A default Spree install comes with the "spree_auth_devise":https://github.com/spree/spree_auth_devise gem, which provides authentication for Spree using Devise. This section of the guide covers the default setup. If you're using your own authentication, please consult the manual for that authentication engine.

We have configure Devise to handle only what is needed to authenticate with a Spree site. The following details cover the default configurations:

* Passwords are stored in the database encrypted with the salt.
* User authentication is done through the database query.
* User registration is enabled and the users login is available immediately (no validation emails).
* There is a remember me and password recovery tool built in and enabled through Devise.
* +http_auth_basic+ is enable to accommodate the API query interface. (See below for security notes relating to the API)

INFO: These configurations represent a reasonable starting point for a typical e-commerce site.  Devise can be configured extensively to allow for a different feature set but that is currently beyond the scope of this document.  Developers are encouraged to visit the Devise wiki for more details.

h4. REST API

The REST API behaves slightly differently that a standard user. First, an admin has to create the access key before any user can query the REST API, this includes generating the key for the admin him/herself. Obviously it is up to you to communicate that key. This is a 20 character key that is passed through the HTTP_AUTHENTICATION header (See the "documentation":rest.html for how to authenticate with the REST API). As an added measure this authentication has to occur on every request made through the REST API as no session or cookies are created or stored for the REST API.

h3. Authorization

Spree uses the excellent "CanCan":https://github.com/ryanb/cancan gem to provide authorization services.  If you are unfamiliar with it, you should take a look at Ryan Bates' "excellent screen cast":http://railscasts.com/episodes/192-authorization-with-cancan on the topic (or read the "transcribed version":http://asciicasts.com/episodes/192-authorization-with-cancan.)  A detailed explanation of CanCan is beyond the scope of this guide.

h4. Default Rules

The follow Spree source code is taken from +ability.rb+ and provides some insight into the default authorization rules:

<ruby>
if user.has_role? 'admin'
  can :manage, :all
else
  #############################
  can :read, User do |resource|
    resource == user
  end
  can :update, User do |resource|
    resource == user
  end
  can :create, User
  #############################
  can :read, Order do |order, token|
    order.user == user || order.token && token == order.token
  end
  can :update, Order do |order, token|
    order.user == user || order.token && token == order.token
  end
  can :create, Order
  #############################
  can :read, Product
  can :index, Product
  #############################
  can :read, Taxon
  can :index, Taxon
  #############################
end
</ruby>

The above rule set has the following practical effects for Spree users

* Admin role can access anything (the rest of the rules are ignored)
* Anyone can create a +User+, only the user associated with an account can perform read or update operations
* Anyone can create an +Order+, only the user associated with the order can perform read or update operations
* Anyone can read product pages and look at lists of +Products+ (including search operations)
* Anyone can read or view a list of +Taxons+.

h4. Enforcing the Rules

CanCan is only effective in enforcing authorization rules if its asked.  In other words, if the source code does not check permissions there is no way to deny access based on those permissions.  This is generally handled by adding the appropriate code to your Rails controllers.

h4. Custom Authorization Rules

We have modified the original CanCan concept to make it easier for extension developers and end users to add their own custom authorization rules.  For instance, if you have an "artwork extension" that allows users to attach custom artwork to an order, you will need to add rules so that they have permissions to do so.

The trick to adding custom authorization rules is to add an +AbilityDecorator+ to your extension and then to register these abilities.  The following code is an example of how to restrict access so that only the owner of the artwork can update it or to view it.

<ruby>
  class AbilityDecorator
    include CanCan::Ability

    def initialize(user)
      can :read, Artwork do |artwork|
        artwork.order && artwork.order.user == user
      end
      can :update, Artwork do |artwork|
        artwork.order && artwork.order.user == user
      end
    end
  end

  Ability.register_ability(AbilityDecorator)
</ruby>

h4. Tokenized Permissions

There are situations where it may be desirable to restrict access to a particular resource without requiring a user to authenticate in order to have that access.  Spree allows so-called "guest checkouts" where users just supply an email address and they're not required to create an account.  In these cases you still want to restrict access to that order so only the original customer can see it.  The solution is to use a "tokenized" URL.

<shell>
http://example.com/orders/token/aidik313dsfs49d
</shell>

Spree provides a +TokenizedPermission+ model used to grant access to various resources through a secure token.  This model works in conjunction with the +Spree::TokenResource+ module which can be used to add tokenized access functionality to any Spree resource.

<ruby>
module Spree::TokenResource

  module ClassMethods
    def token_resource
      has_one :tokenized_permission, :as => :permissable
      delegate :token, :to => :tokenized_permission, :allow_nil => true
      after_create :create_token
    end
  end

  module InstanceMethods
    def create_token
      create_tokenized_permission(:token => ActiveSupport::SecureRandom::hex(8))
      token
    end
  end

  def self.included(receiver)
    receiver.extend ClassMethods
    receiver.send :include, InstanceMethods
  end

end
</ruby>

The +Order+ model is one such model in Spree where this interface is already in use.  The following code snippet shows how to add this functionality through the use of the +token_resource+ declaration:

<ruby>
Order.class_eval do
  token_resource
end
</ruby>

If we examine the default CanCan permissions for +Order+ we can see how tokens can be used to grant access in cases where the user is not authenticated.

<ruby>
can :read, Order do |order, token|
  order.user == user || order.token && token == order.token
end
can :update, Order do |order, token|
  order.user == user || order.token && token == order.token
end
can :create, Order
</ruby>

This configuration states that in order to read or update an order, you must be either authenticated as the correct user, or supply the correct authorizing token.

The final step is to ensure that the token is passed to CanCan when the authorization is performed.

<ruby>
authorize! action, resource, session[:access_token]
</ruby>

Of course this also assume that the token has been stored in the session.  Generally this can be achieved with a route that maps the token to the correct parameter

<shell>
match '/orders/:id/token/:token' => 'orders#show', :via => :get, \
:as => :token_order
</shell>

This is followed by a call to store the token in the session for possible future access.

<shell>
session[:access_token] ||= params[:token]
</shell>

h3. Credit Card Data

h4. PCI Compliance

All store owner wishing to process credit card transactions should be familiar with "PCI Compliance":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pci_compliance.  Spree makes absolutely no warranty regarding PCI compliance (or anything else for that matter - see the "LICENSE":http://spreecommerce.com/license for details.)  We do, however, follow common sense security practices in handling credit card data.

h4. Transmit Exactly Once

Spree uses extreme caution in its handling of credit cards.  In production mode, credit card data is transmitted to Spree via SSL.  The data is immediately relayed to your chosen payment gateway and then discarded.  The credit card data is never stored in the database (not even temporarily) and it exists in memory on the server for only a fraction of a second before it is discarded.

INFO: Spree does store the last four digits of the credit card and the expiration month and date.  You could easily customize Spree further if you wanted and opt out of storing even that little bit of information.

h4. Payment Profiles

Spree also supports the use of "payment profiles."  This means that you can "store" a customers credit card information in your database securely.  More precisely you store a "token" that allows you to use the credit card again.  The credit card gateway is actually the place where the credit card is stored.  Spree ends up storing a token that can be used to authorize new charges on that same card without having to store sensitive credit card details.

NOTE: Spree has out of the box support for "Authorize.net CIM":http://www.authorize.net/solutions/merchantsolutions/merchantservices/cim/ payment profiles.

h4. Other Options

There are also third-party extensions for Paypal's "Express Checkout":https://merchant.paypal.com/cgi-bin/marketingweb?cmd=_render-content&content_ID=merchant/express_checkout (formerly called Paypal Express.)  These types of checkout services handle processing of the credit card information offsite (the data never touches your server) and greatly simplify the requirements for PCI compliance.

"Braintree":http://www.braintreepaymentsolutions.com/ also offers a very interesting gateway option that achieves a similar benefit as Express Checkout but allows the entire process to appear to be taking place on the site.  In other words, the customer never appears to leave the store during the checkout.  They describe this as a "transparent redirect."  The Braintree team is very interested in helping other Ruby developers use their gateway and have provided support to Spree developers in the past who were interested in using their product.

h3. Security Alerts

Spree will periodically check for important security and release announcements. You will see them on the administration console pages. Alerts may be dismissed after you have read them. The automatic checking can be disabled under Configuration | General Settings. Some configuration information is included when checking so the alerts can be customized to your specific installation. Here is an example of the configuration information included in the alert request:

<javascript>
  {"name"=>"Spree Demo Site",
   "rails_version"=>"3.1.1",
   "version"=>"0.70.1",
   "rails_env"=>"production",
   "host"=>"www.spreecommerce.com"}
</javascript>
