---
title: Spree 0.60.0
section: version
---

# Summary

The 0.60.0 release contains a significant change to all controllers
within Spree as they have been refactored to remove the use of the
[resource_controller](https://github.com/jamesgolick/resource_controller)
gem. This release may have an impact on existing extensions or site
customizations that leverage some of resource_controllers features, so
it's important to read the details on it's removal below and review any
code which might be affected.

While the removal of resource_controller is not most glamous or
exciting change, it's another significant stepping stone to our 1.0
release.

***
We're always looking for more help with the Spree documentation.
If you'd like to offer assistance please contact us on the spree-user
mailing list and we can give you commit access to the
documentation project.
***

# Database Migrations

There are no database migrations to worry about in this release
(assuming you are already running Spree 0.50.x).

!!!
Always be sure to perform a complete database backup before
performing any operations.
!!!

# Removal of resource_controller

The resource_controller gem has been central to Spree's controllers
from one it's earliest releases and was responsible for some of Spree's
customizability features. It's removal has been discussed (endlessly)
and worked on for quite some time. It's original lack of Rails 3.0
support delayed Spree's 0.30.0 release for sometime while we forked and
updated the gem to support Rails 3. However it was still felt that the
library was too overbearing for Spree's needs and added unneeded
complexity to it's controllers.

Some earlier Spree releases removed its usage from the more complex
front-end controllers (like OrdersController and CheckoutController) and
this release extends this to all front-end controllers.

## Supported Functionality

The majority of backend (Admin) controllers now base off of
*Admin::ResourceController* class which provides a much simpler and
slimmed down version of resource_controllers existing features, while
attempting to maintain backwards compatibility for the majority commonly
used extension points.

*Admin::ResourceController* provides several resource_controller style
features as follows.

### Standard CRUD Methods

There are basic implementations of all the standard CRUD methods:

-   *:index*
-   *:show*
-   *:create*
-   *:read*
-   *:update*
-   *:destroy*

### In Action Callbacks

-   *:update.before*
-   *:create.before*
-   *:update.after*
-   etc.

### URL Helpers

-   *new_object_url*
-   *edit_object_url*
-   *object_url*
-   *collection_url*

!!!
Use of these generic helpers is discouraged in favor of the
default Rails helper urls.
!!!

### Instance Variables

-   *`object+
    * +`collection*

!!!
Use of these variables is strongly discouraged. Use the actual
Rails standard variable names instead.
!!!

## Unsupported Functionality

*Admin::ResourceController* does **NOT** provide the following
resource_controller features:

### Custom Responses

-   *create.wants.js*
-   *update.wants.html*

These have been replaced with a new method called *respond_override*

***
See the Customization guide for more details
on *respond_override*
***

### Deprecated Methods

These methods are deprecated and should either be removed or replaced
with a custom *load_resource* method (see *Admin::ResourceController*
source for details).

-   *object*
-   *collection methods*

The following method for custom flash messages has been removed entirely
(with no replacement approach.)

-   *create.flash*

Admin::ResourceController's use is encouraged in extensions and/or site
customizations that require basic CRUD admin controllers. It should not
be used on front-end or complex admin controllers, as you can see from
the current source even certain core admin controllers do not use it
(for example Admin::OrdersController).

***
While the use of resource_controller has been completely removed
from all of Spree's core controllers, the dependency on
resource_controller gem will remain for a while to allow extension
authors to update their projects.
***

# Miscellaneous Changes

There are also a series of minor bug fixes and improvments. Please see
the [Github
compare](https://github.com/spree/spree/compare/v0.50.2...v0.60.0) for
more details.
