---
title: Spree 2.0.0
section: version
---

## Major/new features

### General

#### Splitting up core

A lot of people have requested the ability to use either the backend or the
frontend separately from the other. We did a lot of work toward this goal as part of
["#2225"](https://github.com/spree/spree/issues/2225) and now Spree is split up
into the following components:

* API
* **Backend**
* Core
* Dash
* **Frontend**
* Sample

The **Backend** component provides the admin interface for Spree and the
**Frontend** component provides the frontend user-facaing checkout interface. These
components were extracted out of Core to allow for users of Spree to override the frontend
or backend functionality of Spree as they choose. Core now contains just the very basic
needs for Spree.

Along with this work, the Promo engine has now been merged with Spree core. We
saw that there was a lot of hackery going on to get promos to work with Core,
and a lot of stores want promos anyway, and so merging them made sense.

#### Split shipments

TODO: Add note about Split Shipments here.

#### I18n

Spree 2.0 now comes with namespaced translations so that translations in your application
will no longer conflict with those within Spree. It's recommended that if you have extension
that uses Spree to move its translations into the Spree namespace to avoid the same problem.

Translations within Spree views should now use the `Spree.t` helper, rather than the `t`
helper so that they are namespaced correctly.

### API

#### New API endpoints

API clients can now manage the following resources through the API:

* Checkouts
* Option Types
* Option Values
* Inventory Units
* Shipments
* Stock Items
* Stock Locations
* Stock Movements

The documentation for these endpoints hasn't been written yet, but will be shortly.

#### Instance level permissions

The API now can enforce instance-level permissions on objects. This means that
some users would be able to access a single item within a resource, rather than
an "all or none" approach to the API.

<%= commit "548dc0c58e4400501bc67cddea942fda1c7dbad3" %>


#### Custom API templates

If you wish to use a custom template for an API response you can do this by
passing in a `template` parameter to API requests.

[Read the documentation for more
information](http://edgeguides.spreecommerce.com/api/summary.html#customizing-responses).

### Core

#### Adjustment state changes

Adjustments can now be open, closed or finalized, allowing for a more flexible
 adjustments system. An 'open' adjustment can be modified, whereas a 'closed'
 adjustment cannot. Finalized adjustments are never altered.

<%= commit "43a3cca49180b1572e41bc3638d3ca0f0e9116d9" %>

#### OrderPopulator

Order population responsibility has been moved out to its own class. This has
been done so that the API, Core and any other extensions that wish to use the
order population logic have an easy way to do so.
 
See <%= issue 2341 %> and <%= commit "432d129c86e03597347cd223507d9386e9613d62" %> for more information.

### Dash

### Promo

## Minor changes

### API

#### CheckoutsController


The Spree API now has support for "checking out" an order. This API
functionality allows an existing order to be updated and advanced until
it is in the complete state.

For instance, if you have an order in the "confirm" state that you would
like to advance to the "complete" state, make the following request:

```bash
PUT /api/checkouts/ORDER_NUMBER
```

For more information on using the new CheckoutsController, please see
the <%= link_to "Checkouts API Documentation", "checkouts" %>.

## Trivial changes

* `ShippingMethod` labels can now be overriden by overriding the
`adjustment_label` method. <%= issue(2222) %>
* Promotion rules that respond to `#products` will have their products considered in promotion adjustments. <%= issue 2363 %>
