---
title: Spree 3.1.0
section: version
---

## Major/New Features

### Versioned API

While we've had the ability to version our API we weren't making use of it.
Now that we're beginning to write a new API we've added a v1 namespace,
and default routing /api requests to use /api/v1.  The /api/v2 will be opt-in
until we feel it is complete, and have deprecated /api/v1 (likely for Spree 4).

### Dynamic prices depending on zone for VAT countries

The European Union has come up with new legislation requiring digital products
to be taxed using the customer's shipping address. In turn, this means that prices
have to be shown depending on the current order's tax zone.

Your order will always use the price for the current tax zone. After the address step in
the checkout process, the order will fetch the prices from the Variant again in order to
make sure they're correct.

For more information, see the [taxation guide](https://guides.spreecommerce.com/developer/taxation.html).

### Spree::Alert Removed

Spree Alert model has been removed, and will no longer ping alerts.spreecommerce.com
to check for notifications.

### Future Discontinue of Products & Variants
Soft deleting means that the records are left in the database but behave as if they are really deleted. Because associations from other objects (like line itmes to variant) won't normally see the deleted, core code is forced (unnaturally) to use scopes like ```.with_deleted```

We are fixing this by adding new feilds 'Discontinue On' to products & variants (discontinue_on)
                                                        
This fixes a design flaw in that in most stores these objects really should not be considered "deleted."  The approach proposed solves the underlying flaw and all the related bugs caused by this flaw in the following ways:

- Migrate the timestamps deleted_at to discontinue_on (when possible), and un-delete the deleted variants (when there is not matching SKU) and products (when there is no matching slug)

- Redefine scopes Products object (see active, not_discontinued, etc)

- Removes all references to unscope association chains from other objects to the Product & Variant objects in places where unscope is used explicitly to work-around the default scope problem. (This is a big win because it makes the associations cleaner and easier to work with.)

- Although it is slightly counter-intuitive, we have left the deleted_at fields in place (although their data will be moved to discontinued_at field and their values will be reset to NULL in the db migration). You can (and should!) use deleting to remove human-error mistakes (real mistakes) before the items get sold in your store, or in the case when you have duplicate slugs (Products) or SKUs (Variants) in your database. In those special cases only, you should continue to use delete. In all other cases, use the new discontinue_on feature.

- You can only delete a Product or Variant if no orders have been placed for that product/variant. Once the variant is associated with a Line item, it can never be "deleted," and instead you must use the new discontinue_on feature. Model-level checks (before_destroy) enforce this.

- Note: The DB migration should fix your database correctly unless you have created new Products & Variants with matching slugs/SKUs of deleted records. In this case, you must use the included rake db:fix_orphan_line_items task to clean up your records. Both the schema migration and the script are very pro-active in helping you fix your own database.



## Upgrade

### Update Gemfile & Run Migrations

### Other Gotchas

#### Make sure to v1 namespace custom rabl templates & overrides.

If your rabl templates reference others with extend you'll need to add the v1 namespace.

For example:

```ruby
extends 'spree/api/zones/show'
```

Becomes:

```ruby
extends 'spree/api/v1/zones/show'
```

#### Remove Spree::Config.check_for_spree_alerts

If you were disabling the alert checks you'll now want to remove this preference as it's no longer used.

#### Noteworthy Changes

Also please review each of the noteworthy changes, and ensure your customizations
or extensions are not effected. If you are affected by a change, and have any
of your own tips please submit a PR to help the next person!

## Full Changelog

You can view the full changes using [Github Compare](https://github.com/spree/spree/compare/3-0-stable...3-1-stable).

## Noteworthy Changes

* API v1 namespace to begin transition to v2.

    [Ben A. Morgan](https://github.com/spree/spree/pull/6046)

* Remove all HABTM associations in favour of HMT associations.

    This removes the `Spree::ShippingMethod::HABTM` error message;
    Allows users to extend the joins tables since they are now models;
    And use the [Apartment](https://github.com/influitive/apartment) gem to their hearts content.

    [Ben A. Morgan](https://github.com/spree/spree/pull/6627)

* Removed Spree::Alert

    [Jeff Dutil](https://github.com/spree/spree/pull/6516)

* Remove automatic payment creation with default credit card

    [Darby Perez](https://github.com/spree/spree/pull/6601)

* Allow checkout errors to be displayed when updating customer details

    [Darby Perez](https://github.com/spree/spree/pull/6604)

* Add default Refund Reason to `seeds.rb`

  Creating a Refund will fail if there's no refund reason record in the database. That
  reason has to have the name set to "Return processing" and the mutable flag set to `false`.

  See https://github.com/spree/spree/blob/master/core/app/models/spree/refund_reason.rb#L5-L10

    [Martin Meyerhoff](https://github.com/spree/spree/pull/6528)

* Add a `current_price_options` helper to guide price calculation in the shop

  When you use dynamic prices (as detailed above), those prices will depend on something
  (like the tax zon of the current order, or whether your customer is a business customer).
  These option are set using the new `current_price_options` helper. If your prices depend on
  something else, overwrite this method and add more key/value pairs to the Hash it returns.

  Be careful though to also patch the following parts of Spree accordingly:

  * `Spree::VatPriceCalculation#gross_amount`
  * `Spree::LineItem#update_price`
  * `Spree::Stock::Estimator#taxation_options_for`
  * Subclass the `DefaultTax` calculator

    [Martin Meyerhoff](https://github.com/spree/spree/pull/6662)

* Added `Spree.admin_path` option for a dynamic admin path; making automated 'script' attacks on the backend more difficult. 

  You can simply configure the option by assigning the path in your Spree initializer:
  ```ruby
  Spree.admin_path = "/my-secret-backend"
  ```

  NOTE: Plugins are not converted and still use the default /admin path. But these plugins can be 
  changed easily by adding the `path: Spree.admin_path` option in the routes.

    [Rick Blommers](https://github.com/spree/spree/pull/6739)

* Change to Use Time.current instead of Time.now

    Rails uses config.time_zone to set time zone for the application, but Time.now uses server time zone instead
    of using set config.time_zone. So, in order to use application time zone we need to use Time.current/Time.zone.now.

    [Abhishek Jain](https://github.com/spree/spree/pull/6761)
  
