---
title: Spree 3.3.0
section: version
---

## Major/New Features

### Add `quantity` to inventory units and split on demand

Optimising Shipments and Inventory Units.

* Creates a single `inventory_unit` per `state`, per `line_item`, per `stock_location` with a `quantity` field indicating inventory units in that state.
* Adds a `return_quantity` field in `ReturnAuthorization` indicating the number of units to be returned/exchanged.
* Split inventory unit to extract the portion/quantity that needs to be returned. This might be further split depending upon stock availability at the time of generating return.
* Changes prioritizer and adjuster to maximise the number of `on_hand` items from available stocks in multiple `stock_locations`
* Change `splitters/weight.rb` to use **Worst Fit** algo.

Contributed by [Vinsol](https://github.com/spree/spree/pull/7790)

## Upgrade

### Update Gemfile

```
gem 'spree', '~> 3.3.0.alpha'
gem 'spree_auth_devise', '~> 3.2.0.beta'
gem 'spree_gateway', '~> 3.2.0.beta'
```

### Update your extensions

We're changing how extensions dependencies work. Previously you had to match
extension branch to Spree branch. Starting from now `master` branch of all
`spree-contrib` extensions should work with Spree >= `3.1` and < `4.0`. Please change
your extensions in Gemfile eg.:

from:
```
gem 'spree_braintree_vzero', github: 'spree-contrib/spree_braintree_vzero', branch: '3-1-stable'
```

to:
```
gem 'spree_braintree_vzero', github: 'spree-contrib/spree_braintree_vzero'
```

### Run `bundle update`

### Install missing migrations

```
rails spree:install:migrations
rails spree_auth:install:migrations
rails spree_gateway:install:migrations
```

### Run migrations

```
rails db:migrate
```


### Other Gotchas

#### Noteworthy Changes

Also please review each of the noteworthy changes, and ensure your customizations
or extensions are not effected. If you are affected by a change, and have any
of your own tips please submit a PR to help the next person!

## Full Changelog

You can view the full changes using [Github Compare](https://github.com/spree/spree/compare/3-2-stable...master).

## Noteworthy Changes
