---
title: Spree 0.40.0
section: release_notes
order: 24
---

# Summary

Spree 0.40.0 represents another step forward towards the eventual 1.0.0
release. This version focuses heavily on authentication and
authorization. Most sites running 0.30.x will be able to upgrade with
very little difficulty. We're still working on identifying all of the
Spree extensions that run 0.40.x but its a fairly safe bet that any
extension running 0.30.x will work with this release.

---

We're always looking for more help with the Spree documentation.
If you'd like to offer assistance please contact us on the spree-user
mailing list and we can give you commit access to the documentation
project.

---

# Database Migrations

There are several new database changes in the 0.40.0 release. You will
need to update your database migrations as follows:

````bash
bundle exec rake spree:install:migrations
bundle exec rake db:migrate```

!!!
Always be sure to perform a complete database backup before
performing any operations. It is also suggested that you examine the new
migrations closely before running them so you are aware of what changes
are being made to your database.
!!!

# Replacing Authlogic with Devise

Spree has replaced the authlogic gem in favor of
[Devise](https://github.com/plataformatec/devise) for all authentication
methods. In part an effort to both simplify customization strategies,
due to devise's modular nature, and allow for much simpler creation of
extensions needing different authentication schemas and scopes. We have
made every effort to maintain the backward compatibility required to
upgrade an existing site. This means that naming conventions, and
routing have all remained intact where possible as well as the use of
deprecation notices.

The database changes, described below, are made to offer as much
flexibility as Devise itself offers and enabling you to implement,
adjust the behavior, or remove features fairly effortlessly for those
familiar with Devise.

## Miscellaneous Clean Up

Some of the biggest changes to the Spree authentication process is
consolidation of most all the user management functions into the
*spree_auth* gem. Prior versions of Spree still had small bits of code
floating around in *spree_core* etc. So some files have simply been
moved to where they should have been all along.

## Upgrading Existing Sites

We have tried to minimize changes and when possible, naming conventions
have be maintained. The result is that only one controller has been
moved and renamed. Routing and the named route conventions having been
maintained as well.

***
The file *core/password_resets_controller.rb* has been renamed
and moved to *auth/user_password_resets_controller.rb*
***

We have already set up devise to handle the existing encryption scheme
that authlogic used so there is no need to make any changes and the
current users will work "out of the box".

# Changes to the REST API

Spree 0.40.x introduces several minor but important changes to the REST
API. If you are currently relying on the API you should be aware of a
few important changes. Please also consult the detailed [REST
Guide](http://guides.spreecommerce.org/legacy/0-40-x//rest.html) for more details.

## New Authentication Mechanism

The most significant change to the REST API is related to
authentication. The recent adoption of
[Devise](https://github.com/plataformatec/devise) for authentication in
general has resulted in new opportunities to improve authentication for
the API specifically.

Prior to Spree 0.40.x the old method of authentication was to pass an
authentication token in the header. This involved using the specially
designated *X-SpreeAPIKey* header and passing a corresponding token
value. The new approach is to use standard *HTTP_AUTHORIZATION* which
is already nicely implemented by Devise.

If you were using curl you could achieve this authentication as follows:

```bash
curl ~~u V8WPYgRdSZN1mSQG17sK:x \
http://example.com/api/orders.json```

Note that we are using the token as the "user name" and passing "x" as a
password here. There is nothing special about "x", its just a
placeholder since many HTTP Basic Authentication implementations require
a password to be submitted. In our case the token is sufficient so we
use a placeholder for the password.

h4. Support for *.json* Suffix

It is now recommended that you consider using a *.json* suffix in your
URL when communicating via the REST API. This is technically not a new
feature~~ it was always possible in older versions of the REST API.
We've updated the documentation to suggest this simpler approach (which
avoids the necessity of passing *Accept:application/json* in the
header.)

```bash
curl -u V8WPYgRdSZN1mSQG17sK:x http://example.com/api/orders.json```

# Tokenized Permissions

There are situations where it may be desirable to restrict access to a
particular resource without requiring a user to authenticate in order to
have that access. Spree allows so-called "guest checkouts" where users
just supply an email address and they're not required to create an
account. In these cases you still want to restrict access to that order
so only the original customer can see it. The solution is to use a
"tokenized" URL.

```bash
http://example.com/orders/token/aidik313dsfs49d
````

Spree provides a _TokenizedPermission_ model used to grant access to
various resources through a secure token. This model works in
conjunction with the _Spree::TokenResource_ module which can be used to
add tokenized access functionality to any Spree resource.

The _Order_ model is one such model in Spree where this interface is
already in use. The following code snippet shows how to add this
functionality through the use of the _token_resource_ declaration:

```ruby
Order.class_eval do
  token_resource
end
```

If we examine the default CanCan permissions for _Order_ we can see how
tokens can be used to grant access in cases where the user is not
authenticated.

```ruby
can :read, Order do |order, token|
  order.user  user || order.token && token  order.token
end
can :update, Order do |order, token|
  order.user  user || order.token && token  order.token
end
can :create, Order
```

This configuration states that in order to read or update an order, you
must be either authenticated as the correct user, or supply the correct
authorizing token.

The final step is to ensure that the token is passed to CanCan when the
authorization is performed. Most controllers will do this automatically
if they declare _resource_controller_.

```ruby
authorize! action, resource, session[:access_token]
```

---

Since _OrdersController_ does not implement _resource_controller_
this is done explicitly in the controller

---

For more information on tokenized permissions please read the detailed
security guide.
