---
title: Spree 0.70.0
section: release_notes
order: 20
---

# Summary

This 0.70.0 release is the first Spree release to support Rails 3.1 and
contains several exciting new features including a complete overhaul of
the theming system and major improvements to the Promotions system.

---

We're always looking for more help with the Spree documentation.
If you'd like to offer assistance please contact us on the spree-user
mailing list and we can give you commit access to the documentation
project.

---

# Theming Improvments

Theming support in this release has change significantly and all the new
features are covered in detail in the following guides:

- [Customization Overview](http://guides.spreecommerce.org/legacy/0-70-x/customization.html) - provides a high level
  introduction to all the customization and theming options now
  provided by Spree.
- [View Customization](http://guides.spreecommerce.org/legacy/0-70-x/view_customization.html) - introduces and
  explains how to use Deface to customize Spree's views.
- [Asset Customization](http://guides.spreecommerce.org/legacy/0-70-x/asset_customization.html) - explains how Spree
  uses Rails' new asset pipeline, and how you can use it to customize
  the stylesheets, javascripts and images provided by Spree.

---

While the upgrade instructions that follow briefly cover the new
asset pipeline features we suggest you review the guides above as part
of your upgrade preparation.

---

## Themes as engines

In previous versions (0.11.x and earlier) Spree encouraged the approach
of bundling themes in their own extensions, with the advent of the asset
pipeline in Rails 3.1 and the upcoming Theme Editor we're bringing back
this approach as a suitable model for distributing and sharing themes.

While the distinction between themes and extensions is covered in the
[Extensions & Themes](http://guides.spreecommerce.org/legacy/0-70-x/extensions.html) guide they are both just Rails
engines and can be treated as such.

We've created two front-end themes to help show this new approach in
action:

- [Spree Blue](https://github.com/spree/spree_blue_theme) - Recreates
  the original "blue" theme of 0.60.x as a stand alone theme.

- [Rails Dog Radio](https://github.com/spree/spree_rdr_theme) - This
  recreates some of the aspects of the Rails Dog Radio demo
  application for a default Spree application.

Both themes can be installed by just adding a reference to the git
repository to your Gemfile, ie:

```ruby
gem 'spree_blue_theme', git: 'git://github.com/spree/spree_blue_theme.git'
```

# Experimental SCSS/SASS Theme

LESS proves to be unpopular amongst Spree developers so it is decided to
retire LESS stylesheets of `spree_blue_theme` in favor for all-in-one
`screen.css`.

Yet with the recently adopted SCSS/SASS in Rails 3.1, we believe this
technology could become de-facto standard for CSS someday. Thus, we
create the experimental SCSS/SASS version of
[spree_blue_sass_theme]("https://github.com/spree/spree_blue_sass_theme")
to collect feedbacks before we could come up with a decision to opt for
SCSS/SASS in future version of Spree.

# The Asset Pipeline

One of the more interesting new features included in Rails 3.1 is the
asset pipeline, and a lot of the customization improvements in Spree are
enabled by this feature. While the asset pipeline provides excellent
flexibility and improved organization for all of Spree's assets (images,
javascripts and stylesheets) it does add a significant overhead as all
asset requests are now being handled by Rails itself (and not being
handed off to the web server).

This can be especially noticeable in development mode when using a
single process application server like Webrick. This release of Spree
includes a small tweak to the standard pre-compiling rake task that
allows pre-compiling of assets for development mode.

## Pre-compiling in production

Rails supports pre-compiling of assets which is intended to offload the
overhead of generating and serving assets from the application server in
production environments.

Pre-compiling is not required for the asset pipeline to function
correctly in production, if you choose to not pre-compile Rails will
generate each asset only once and serve each subsequent request using
Rack::Cache.

Rack::Cache is generally sufficient for lower traffic sites, but
pre-compiling will provide some additional speed increases by allowing
the web server to serve all assets, including gzipped versions of
javascript and css files.

To pre-compile assets for production you would normally execute the
following rake task (on the production server).

```bash
bundle exec rake assets:precompile
```

This would write all the assets to the `public/assets` directory while
including an MD5 fingerprint in the filename for added caching benefits.

---

In production all references to assets from views using
image_tag, asset_path, javascript_include_tag, etc. will
automatically include this fingerprint in the file name so the correct
version will be served.

---

## Pre-compiling for development

Spree alters the behaviour of the precompile rake task as follows:

````bash
bundle exec rake assets:precompile:nondigest```

It will still output the assets to `public/assets` but it will not
include the MD5 fingerprint in the filename, hence the files will be
served in development directly by the web server (and not processed by
Rails).

!!!
Using the precompile rake task in development will prevent any
changes to asset files from being automatically included in when you
reload the page. You must re-run the precompile task for changes to
become available.
!!!

Rail's also provides the following rake task that will delete the entire
`public/assets` directory, this can be helpful to clear out development
assets before committing.

```bash
bundle exec rake assets:clean```

It might also be worthwhile to include the `public/assets` directory in
your `.gitignore` file.

# Promotions

Promotions have been extended well beyond their coupon roots to include
new `activator` support, which can now fire or activate a promotion for
a variety of different user triggered events, including:

-   Adding items to a cart
-   Visiting specific pages
-   Adjusting cart contents
-   Using a coupon code

Promotions also includes a new `Actions` feature which can perform an
action as a result of a promotion being actived, these actions currently
include creating an adjustment or adding additional items to a cart.

For more details on these new promotions feature please refer to the
[Promotions](http://guides.spreecommerce.org/legacy/0-70-x/promotions.html) guide.

# New Extension Generator

There is a new extension generator available as part of this release.
The generator is utilized by a new executable contained within the gem.

You can generate new extensions inside an existing rails application or
as a standalone git repository using the following command

```bash
$ spree extension foofah
````

One of the most important advances in this new generator is that you can
now easily run specs for extensions in their own standalone repository.
You just need to create a test application (one time only) as a context
before running your specs.

```bash
bundle exec rake test_app
bundle exec rspec spec
```

You can get more information on the extension generator in the [Creating
Extensions](http://guides.spreecommerce.org/legacy/0-70-x/creating_extensions.html) guide.

---

You must install the spree gem in order to use the new extension
generator.

---

# Upgrade Instructions

These instructions are mainly concerned with upgrading Spree
applications, extension developers should jump straight to the "Asset
Customization"asset_customization.html and [View
Customization](http://guides.spreecommerce.org/legacy/0-70-x/view_customization.html) guides for details on the
changes that are required for extensions to fulling support 0.70.0.

## Before you begin

To prevent problems later please ensure that you've copied all the
migrations from your current version of Spree and all the extensions
that you are running. While this is normal practice when setting up
Spree and extensions any missing migrations will cause issues later in
the upgrade process.

You can check that all Spree migrations are copied by running:

```bash
bundle exec rake spree:install:migrations
```

Each extension will provide it's own rake task (or generator) for
copying migrations so please refer to the extensions README for
instructions.

!!!
It's vital that you confirm this first before starting the
upgrade process as Rails 3.1 has altered how engine migrations are
handled and incorrectly copying migrations later could result in data
loss.
!!!

## Changes required for Rails 3.1

Most of the changes required to upgrade a Spree application to 0.70.0 is
same for any Rails 3.0.x application upgrading to 3.1.

### Gemfile changes

You'll need to make several additions and changes to your Gemfile:

- Update spree to 0.70.0
- Update rails to 3.1.1
- Update mysql2 to 0.3.6 - if your using it.
- Ensure the assets group is present:

```ruby
group :assets do
  gem 'sass-rails', "~> 3.1.1"
  gem 'coffee-rails', "~> 3.1.1"
  gem 'uglifier'
end
```

### Update config/boot.rb

Rails 3.1 simplifies the `config/boot.rb` file significantly, so update
yours to match:

```ruby
require 'rubygems'

# Set up gems listed in the Gemfile.
ENV['BUNDLE_GEMFILE'] ||= File.expand_path('../../Gemfile', *FILE*)

require 'bundler/setup' if File.exists?(ENV['BUNDLE_GEMFILE'])
```

### Enable the asset pipeline

Add the following line to `config/application.rb`, this will enable the
Asset Pipeline feature (required by 0.70.0):

```ruby
config.assets.enabled = true
```

### Remove deprecated configuration

Remove the following line from `config/environments/development.rb`.

```ruby
config.action_view.debug_rjs = true
```

### Retire lib/spree_site.rb

The spree_site.rb file is no longer required so it's important to
migrate any existing code out of this file and into the correct
location.

- Model, controller or helper evals should be relocated to a suitable
  \_decorator.rb file.
- Configuration settings should be moved to initializers.
- If you are activating custom Abilities or Calculators, you should
  remove then for now. You can re-add them to config/application.rb
  after you've ran the spree:site generator below. They will need to
  be inside the `config.to_prepare` block.

---

The decorator initialization block will be automatically included
in config/application.rb for you, when you run the spree:site generator
below.

---

### Remove spree_site from config/application.rb

Also ensure the following line is **not** present in
config/application.rb:

```ruby
require 'spree_site'
```

## Update gems & generate Spree files

Once you've completed all the Rails 3.1 steps above, you can now update
your dependencies and start generating the new asset pipeline
placeholders.

### Install dependencies

Install all the required gems, and lock your dependencies by running:

````bash
    bundle update```

### Generate & copy required files

Running the `spree:site` generator will create the skeleton structure
for the asset pipeline, and also copy missing migrations.

```bash
    rails g spree:site```

After running the generator above, it's best to check to make sure you
do not have multiple copies of the following line, in
`config/application.rb`:

```ruby
config.middleware.use "RedirectLegacyProductUrl"
config.middleware.use "SeoAssist"
````

### Update your database

If you encounter any issues with this step please ensure you've
completed the [Before you
begin](#before-you-begin) section above.

!!!
Make sure you've taken a backup of the database before
attempting this step.
!!!

````bash
bundle exec rake db:migrate```

## Migrating your assets

Cleaning up your `/public` directory is one major advantage of using
Rails 3.1. The main task required here is to separate your application
specific assets (javascript, stylesheets and images) from all of Spree's
(and all those belonging to all the extensions installed) which have
been mingled together in your public directory.

### Asset Organization

Assets should be placed inside your application in one of three
locations: `app/assets`, `lib/assets` or `vendor/assets`.

`app/assets` is for assets that are owned by the application, such as
custom images, JavaScript files or stylesheets.

`lib/assets` is for your own libraries' code that doesn't really fit
into the scope of the application or those libraries which are shared
across applications.

`vendor/assets` is for assets that are owned by outside entities, such
as code for JavaScript plugins.

***
If you are using a library like Jammit solely for concatenating
and minifying your javascript and stylesheet files then we suggest you
remove it from your application as part of the Rails 3.1 upgrade.
***

For a full explanation of how Spree uses Rails' asset pipeline and how
to update your site to use these new features please refer to the [Asset
Customization](http://guides.spreecommerce.org/legacy/0-70-x/asset_customization.html) guide.

### Cleaning up /public

Once you've relocated all <b>your</b> applications assets, the only
remaining directories and files in `/public` should be images that
you've uploaded for your Products (or taxonomies). If you are using the
default Spree configuration these will be in `/public/assets`.

!!!
Leaving any javascript, stylesheet or image files in the public
directory will override those provided by Spree or it's extensions. So
it's vital that you delete all remaining files from the `/public`
directory, <b>EXCEPT YOUR PRODUCT IMAGES!</b>.
!!!

***
If you are using S3 (or another cloud storage system) for your
Product images then your `/public` directory should be completly empty.
***

## Including old style theming hooks

With the introduction of Deface the old style theming hooks have been
deprecated, the old hooks will continue to function after the upgrade as
they are automatically upgraded to Deface overrides, we strongly suggest
you upgrade them as soon as possible.

To include your previously defined old style theming hooks from
`lib/site_hooks.rb` add the following to the bottom of
`config/application.rb`

```ruby
require 'lib/site_hooks'
````

---

The development log will include suggested replacement Deface
overrides anytime Rails encounters a old style hook call. These
suggestions are a best effort replacement, but might need some tweaks as
some elements have been moved while removing the old hook calls from
Spree's view files.

---

For more information about using Deface overrides, please refer to the
[View Customization](http://guides.spreecommerce.org/legacy/0-70-x/view_customization.html) guide.

# New way to register Calculators

Calculators no longer can be registered with _register_ method. The
register method is refactored to take advantage of default Rails
application configuration _Rails.application.config.spree.calculators_.

For more information about this new change, please refer to the
[Ajustments](http://guides.spreecommerce.org/legacy/0-70-x/adjustments.html) guide.
