---
title: Spree 0.9.0
section: release_notes
order: 27
---

!!!
Some of the information here has been made redundant by later
changes.
!!!

# Improved Layout Customization

Work has been done to reduce the likelihood of new projects needing to
override the default Spree layout template _application.html.erb_. The
title, stylesheets, and logo now can all be customized without creating
your own copy of the layout.

## New title methods

There are some new methods for manipulating the page title: the _title_
and _set_title_ helper methods in Spree::BaseController.

Use _set_title_ to set a page title either from a controller method, or
a view template. You can also override the _default_title_ and _title_
methods in Spree::BaseController for further control.

The _title_ method is used in _application.html.erb_ of the new release,
however if you are upgrading and want to take advantage, use this in
between your _&lt;title&gt;_ tags of your layout template

And to set the title in a view template:

## Customize default stylesheets

*Spree::Config+ is a new config option for customizing the stylesheets
used by the default application layout. The value
of*Spree::Config[:stylesheets]+ is a comma-separated string of
stylesheet names without the file extensions. See the customization guide for more information.

If you are upgrading, to take advantage of this use the new
_stylesheet_tags_ helper method.

## Customize logo

\*Spree::Config+ is a new config option for customizing the logo image
path.

If you are upgrading, take advantage of this by using the new\*logo+
helper method.

# Polymorphic Calculators

There has been significant refactoring to the implementation of
calculators. Calculators are now polymorphic and belong to _calculable_.
This will have a non trivial impact on your existing store
configuration. After upgrading to Spree 0.9.0 you are likely going to
have to make several manual adjustments to the existing tax and shipping
configurations. Ultimately we feel this is outweighed by the superior
design of the new calculator system which will allow for a more modular
design.

!!!
Many of the existing calculator extensions are not yet updated
to support Spree 0.9.0. Please check the [extension
registry](https://github.com/spree-contrib) to see which versions are
supported. Our goal is to back port most of the useful calculators out
there shortly after the release.
!!!

All calculators need to implement the following method

```bash
 def compute(something=nil)
 …
 end
```

The calculator is passed an optional "target" on which to base their
calculation. This method is expected to return a single numeric value
when the calculation is complete. A value of _nil_ should be returned in
the event that a charge is not applicable.

Since calculators are now instances of _ActiveRecord::Base_ they can be
configured with preferences. Each instance of _ShippingMethod_ is now
stored in the database along with the configured values for its
preferences. This allows the same calculator (ex.
_Calculator::FlatRate_) to be used with multiple _ShippingMethods_, and
yet each can be configured with different values (ex. different amounts
per calculator.)

Calculators are configured using Spree's flexible preference system. Default values for the preferences are
configured through the class definition. For example, the flat rate
calculator class definition specifies an amount with a default value of 0.

```bash
 class Calculator::FlatRate < Calculator
    preference :amount, :decimal, :default =\> 0
    …
 end
```

Spree now contains a standard mechanism by which calculator preferences
can be edited. The screenshot below shows how the amounts for the flat
rate calculator are now editable directly in the admin interface.

Calculators are now stored in a special _calculator_ directory located
within _app/models_. There are several calculators included that meet
many of the standard store owner needs. Developers are encouraged to
write their own extensions to supply additional
functionality or to consider using a [third party
extension](https://github.com/spree-contrib) written by members of the Spree
community.

Calculators need to be "registered" with Spree in order to be made
available in the admin interface for various configuration options. The
recommended approach for doing this is via an extension. Custom
calculators will typically be written as extensions so you need to add
some registration logic to the extension containing the calculator. This
will allow the calculator to do a one time registration during the
standard extension activation process.

The _CalculatorExtenion_ that is included in the Spree core is a good
example of how you can achieve this in your own custom extensions.

````bash
 def activate
 [
   Calculator::FlatPercent,
   Calculator::FlatRate,
   Calculator::FlexiRate,
   Calculator::PerItem,
   Calculator::SalesTax,
   Calculator::Vat,
   ].each(&:register)
 end```

This calls the *register* method on the calculators that we intend to
register. Spree provides a mechanism for extension authors to specify
the operations for which the calculator is intended. For example, a flat
rate calculator might be useful for all operations but another
calculator may be appropriate only for coupons and not shipping or
taxes.

Models that are declared with *has_calculator* maintains their own set
of registered calculators. Currently this includes *Coupons*,
*ShippingMethods*, *ShippingRates* and *TaxRates*. The following example
shows how to configure a calculator to make it available for use with
*Coupons*.

```bash
  def self.register
     super
     Coupon.register_calculator(self)
  end```

***
Spree automatically configures your calculators for you when using
the basic install and/or third party extensions. This discussion is
intended to help developers and others interested in understanding the
design behind calculators.
***

Once your calculators have been registered correctly by your extensions,
then they will become available as options in the appropriate admin
screens.


# Simplified Tax Configuration

There are also minor changes to how taxes are configured. You no longer
need to specify sales tax or VAT but you do need to choose a calculator
type. Tax rates are configured as preferences for the calculator itself.

!!!
Your tax rates will be lost when you run the migrations. You
will have to recreate them manually in the admin interface.
!!!

# Unified Adjustment Model

Spree 0.9.0 provides a new flexible system of adjustments associated
with orders. The *orders* table no longer has separate columns for
*tax_total*, *ship_total*, etc. This information is now captured more
generically as an *Adjustment*. This allows a Spree application to add
more then one tax or shipping charge per order as well as to support new
types of charges that might be required. For instance, some products for
sale (like cell phones) require a separate activation fee.

Adjustments come in two basic flavors: *Charges* and *Credits*. From an
implementation perspective, they are both modeled in a single database
table called *adjustments* and use the single table inheritance
mechanism of Rails. Charges add to the order total, and credits work in
the opposite direction.

Orders have one or more adjustments associated with them and each
adjustment also belongs to an adjustment source. This allows charges and
credits to recalculate themselves when requested. Adjustments are always
recalculated before they are saved which includes every time and order
is updated. This provides a very flexible system by which an adjustment
can determine that it is no longer relevant based on changes in the
order.

Consider a coupon that takes $5 off all orders over $20. If the order
exceeds the required amount during checkout the coupon will create the
proper adjustment. If the customer then decides to edit their cart
(before completing checkout) then you will want to make sure that the
coupon still qualifies. If the order total drops below the required
amount the source of the adjustment (in this case the coupon) will have
the ability to remove the adjustment based on its own internal logic.

!!!
There are significant changes to the database to support the
new adjustment system. The migrations should update your legacy data and
create the necessary tax and shipping adjustments for existing orders
but you should backup your database before running.
!!!

# Coupons and Discounts

Spree now supports a flexible coupon system. Coupons in an online store
are virtual and can be thought of as "codes" that must be entered during
the checkout process. Coupons serve two important functions. First, they
determine whether or not they are eligible to be used for the offer in
question. Second, they calculate the actual credit/discount that should
be applied to the specific order (assuming that the eligibility
requirement is satisfied.)

## Eligibility

Coupon eligibility is completely customizable on a per coupon basis.
Eligibility is determined by the following factors.

-   **Start Date** - coupons can be configured to be invalid before a
    specific date
-   **Expiration Date** - coupons can be configured so that they are not
    usable passed a certain date
-   **Expiration Date** - coupons can be configured so that they are not
    usable passed a certain date
-   **Number of Uses** - coupons can be restricted to an arbitrary
    number of uses (typically a single use if there's a limit at all)
-   **Combination** - there is an option to restrict specific coupons so
    that they cannot be combined with other coupons in the same order.

Any other restriction on eligibility is intended to be provided by
custom calculators. The *compute* method has access to the complete
order (including shipping and other related information) and can simply
return *nil* if the coupon is not to be applied in a specific situation

***
The next version of Spree will also provide built in filtering for
coupons based on product properties and taxon information. This will
provide a standard way to restrict coupons to certain types of products.
As a workaround, you can accomplish this by hard coding restrictions in
your calculator.
***

## Discount Calculation

The *create_discount* method in *Coupon* is responsible for the actual
calculation of the credit to be applied for the cooupon. By default,
Spree will not allow the credit amount to exceed the item total. The
credit adjustment associated with a coupon is subject to recalculation
based on changes in the order. This is no different then any other
adjustment to the order total (such as shipping or tax charges.)

# RESTful Checkout

There have been several minor but crucial changes to the checkout
process. The primary motivation for these changes was to improve
maintenance of the checkout process and to simplify checkout
customization.

## Checkout Module has been Replaced by Controller

Prior to the refactoring, much of the checkout logic was contained in
*lib/checkout.rb*. The idea was to isolate this logic from the
*OrdersController* and to make it easier to extend. In this release we
have just taken this another step further and made the checkout its own
resource.

## Changes to the Checkout Partials

The views have been shuffled around a bit due to this refactoring. This
shouldn't affect you too much unless you have an existing Spree
application in which you customized some of the checkout partials. For
instance, *app/views/orders/_billing.html.erb* has been moved to
*app/views/checkouts/_billing.html.erb*. So you may need to
rename your custom partials if you have any.

## Additional Details

For more detailed information on the nature of these changes, please see
the [relevant
commit](https://github.com/spree/spree/commit/ce1aad7bc25c15a794f8f5689efcdbf8c3311b7b)
in Github.

# Variant Images

Some changes have been made to allow you to attach images to both the
Product model and each individual variant for a product. The Images
administration has been relocated from the main product details form to
it's own tab accessible via the right hand side bar on the product
details screen.

This new admin interface enables you to select from a drop-down list
which object (product or variant) the image represents. Note if a
product does not contain any variants then the drop-down is not
displayed to ensure that basic implementations are not cluttered with
unnecessary administration options.

The front-end product details interface has also been updated to filter
the displayed images depending on which variant is selected, and the
cart view now displays the image of the selected variant.

# Improvements to image handling

We've upgraded the paperclip gem to take advantage of recent changes.
Paperclip is the library which handles creation of and access to the
various formats of image. On top of this, we're explicitly catching
errors in the image creation stage and returning these via the validation
mechanism - also adding a more meaningful message in the *errors* list. This will avoid the silent
failures that some people have experienced when they don't have image
magick installed correctly.

Another change is to store the original image's width and height: this
info is sometimes useful when working with a set of images with different 'shapes', e.g. where your
images might all have a width of 240 but (minor) variation on height.
Knowing the height of the original allows you to calculate the max
height of your images and thus to create a suitable bounding box.

Finally, note that the processing tools behind paperclip can do many
transformations on the images, such as cropping, color adjustment, … - and these can be requested by
passing the options to paperclip, or you can run the conversions on a batch of images in
advance of loading into Spree. Automatic cropping is particularly useful to make best use of screen
area.

# Update to SearchLogic

Spree now runs with version 2.1.13 of SearchLogic. It has meant some
minor recoding of how searches are set up and paginated, and allowed some of the existing forms to be
simplified (by taking advantage of new functionality) and opened the door to more sophistication in
selecting products, e.g. for handling faceted search or product groups.

There's an overview of what the new SearchLogic offers on the
[Spree
blog](http://spreecommerce.com/blog/2009/07/30/updating-searchlogic/),
and full documentation
is at [rdoc.info](http://rdoc.info/projects/binarylogic/searchlogic).

# Some new named scopes for products

To make it easier to construct sets of products for various uses, we've
added some more named scopes whichhelp with taxon, property, and availability of option values. The first
kind (*taxons_id_in_tree* and
*taxons_id_in_tree_any*) allows restriction to a set of taxons and
their combined descendents. The property
scope *with_property* takes a property object (or its id - the
definition uses Rails' automatic conversion)
and an optional argument for uniquifying the table names in complex
queries, eg where you are filtering by
two distinct properties. This scope does not take a property value: the
design is that you add further
condition(s) on the value in a subsequent scope. It will handle cases
where the property is absent or null
for a product. There is a simpler scope *with_property_value* for
simpler cases.
The option type scope (*with_option*, with its prerequisite
*with_variant_options*) follows the pattern
of option type object or id, and an optional table name, and is intended
as a basis for further conditions
on the value of that option type.
See *lib/product_scopes.rb* for the definitions, and see
*lib/product_filters.rb* for examples of
their use.

# Basic support for filtering of results

It is often useful to cut down the results in a taxon via certain
criteria, such as products in a price
range or with certain properties, and sometimes you want a set of
restrictions selectable via checkboxes etc.
Using ideas from SearchLogic version 2, Spree now contains a basic
framework for this kind of filtering.
You can some basic filtering by visiting */products?taxon=1000* (unless
you have overridden the products
controller), where it allows you to select zero or more of a taxon's
children and to select some price ranges and product brands.

File *lib/product_filters.rb* explains the mechanism in detail, with
several concrete examples. Basically,
a filter definition associates a named scope with a mapping of human
readable labels to internal labels.
The named scope should be defined to test the relevant product
attribute(s), and to convert a set of these
internal labels into tests on the attributes. For example, you may want
to filter by price range, so
should set up labels for price ranges like 0-20, 20-50, 50-100, 100 or
more; then define a named scope
which maps these into a combined test on the (master) price attribute of
products.

The partial *app/views/shared/_filters.html.erb* displays a checkbox
interface for the filters
returned by the method *applicable_filters* for the selected taxon.
This method allows you to control
which filters are used for some taxon, eg a filter on fabric type may be
required for clothing taxons,
but not suitable for mugs etc.

To use this framework, you should override and extend
*lib/product_filters.rb* and define a suitable
*applicable_filters* method for taxons.
The new named scopes (above) are useful building blocks for adding
application-specific filters.

# Miscellaneous improvements

## Default ship and bill addresses

Spree now saves the last used bill and ship addresses for logged in
users and uses these as the defaults
in their next checkout. If the ship or bill addresses are edited in
checkout, then the old addresses are
left unchanged and new addresses saved as the defaults. This is a very
simple form of address book.

## Extension initializers

It is now possible to include initializers in your extensions. This
makes it a lot easier to
configure extensions and to make site-specific customizations, and to
keep them with the relevant
extension code.

## Improved handling of requests for invalid objects

If a method *object_missing* for a controller, Spree will pass all
requests for invalid objects to
this method. This provides an easy way for applications to add specific
handlers for invalid requests.
For example, you may wish to direct customers back to the front page.
If no method has been defined, Spree will use its default 404 response.

## Reduced silent failures in checkout

The checkout code is now more careful about returning and checking
results from key operations, and
a few more handlers for exceptions and invalid responses have been
added. In normal use these should
not occur, but they may sometimes occur if you have an error in your
database or configuration.

## Improvements to Upgrade Process

The *rake spree:upgrade* task has been eliminated. It turns out there
were some crucial flaws that caused issues when the older version of
Spree used a different version of Rails or a different version of
*upgrade.task* than the newer version of Spree. The rake task has been
replaced by a new gem command:

```bash
 spree —update```


You can also use the abbreviated form:

```bash
 spree —u```

After installing a new version of the Spree gem, simply run either one
of these commands from inside *RAILS_ROOT* (your application directory)
and your application will be upgraded.

The update process is also now less "destructive" than in previous
versions of Spree. Instead of silently replacing crucial files in your
application, Spree now checks the content of files it needs to replace,
and if the old version differs, it will be saved with a *\~* suffix.

This makes it easier to see when and how some file has changed - which
is often useful if you need to update a customized version. The update
command will also no longer copy the *routes.rb* file - the original
version just loads the core Spree routes file, so has no need to change.
(Recall that you can define new routes in your extensions.)
````
